# Chapter 1: Good Practice and Safety

> 來源頁面: 22-50

---

<!-- Page 22 -->
Chapter 1 1
Good practice and safety
Rachel Freedman, Lara Herbert, Aidan O’Donnell,
Nicola Ross and Mincho Marroquin- Harris
Responsibilities of the anaesthetist 2
Looking after the patient 3
Looking after yourself 15

<!-- Page 23 -->
2
2 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
Responsibilities of the anaesthetist
the first general anaesthetic was administered in 1846. today, around 313
million anaesthetics are given worldwide every year, with over 3 million in
the United Kingdom (UK) alone. anaesthetists use highly specialised skills
to provide anaesthesia, analgesia and life-s ustaining care for patients under-
going operations and procedures. they also lead the way in safety, crisis
response and education.
Other roles for anaesthetists include the following:
• preoperative assessment and optimisation of patients
• Intensive care medicine
• pain medicine— both acute and chronic
• Obstetric anaesthesia and pain relief in labour
• Resuscitation and stabilisation of patients in the emergency department
(eD) and on the ward
• transport of acutely ill and injured patients
• the provision of anaesthesia or sedation to facilitate a wide range of
medical, dental and radiological interventions and investigations
• prehospital emergency care
• Managerial and organisational roles both inside and outside the theatre
environment
• education, training and simulation.
anaesthetists form the largest specialty group of doctors in the National
health Service (NhS). they work closely with all other hospital special-
ties in locations throughout the hospital. they deliver individualised care,
usually on a one- to- one basis and at times when patients are at their most
vulnerable. anaesthetists are therefore well positioned to be patient safety
advocates at local, national and international levels. Indeed, underpinning
all the other roles and responsibilities of the anaesthetist is the ingrained
commitment to keep patients safe.

<!-- Page 24 -->
LOOKINg afteR the patIeNt 3
Looking after the patient
Perioperative safety
anaesthetists are recognised worldwide as leaders in patient safety.
although modern anaesthesia is very safe, new challenges that impact on
patient safety continue to arise, such as an ageing population, the preva-
lence of medication error, and burnout among anaesthetists. Improvements
in perioperative safety have been greatest in high-i ncome countries, and
although outcomes have improved overall worldwide, there is an urgent
need to address the global inequalities that still exist in perioperative safety.
from a global surgical perspective, it is estimated that 313 million surgical
procedures are performed each year. from elective procedures alone,
around 17% of patients suffer harm and 0.5% die.1 Much of this harm may
be preventable.
Why do complications occur?
accidents are inevitable in systems such as health care because of situational
complexity and the latent factors that set up humans to fail.2 It is therefore
unsurprising that errors occur in the dynamic, and sometimes stressful,
operating theatre environment. Deficiencies in human factors, such as
communication, leadership, teamworking, decision-m aking and situational
awareness, have been shown to contribute substantially to patient harm.
Safety culture
• the new approach to patient safety seems to be much less about
individual projects, and more about changing the culture and creating
systems that enable reliable delivery of care.
• even with the most flawless systems in place, however, human factors
can still lead to error.
• a safety culture starts with leaders taking ownership of safety and
exemplifying it in both actions and words on a daily basis.
• Leaders must steer the difficult balance between holding people
accountable and nurturing a supportive environment where individuals
and teams both have opportunities to learn from their mistakes and feel
empowered to voice their concerns.
• Communication is key. this may be difficult when teams change
continually. It is well recognised that steep hierarchies between
professions may impede effective communication. In poorly functioning
teams, members of staff may not feel able to raise concerns, even when
patient safety is compromised.
Strategies to improve patient safety
Below are a number of strategies that contribute towards improving pa-
tient safety. Many of these approaches are based on the understanding that
humans make mistakes. they encourage both learning from errors and the
creation of robust systems to prevent them:
• Reporting an error is fundamental to error prevention. practitioners
need to feel safe to report their mistakes, knowing that the aim is to
improve safety, rather than to blame individuals.
• patient safety groups champion and promote patient safety and learning,
such as the Safe anaesthesia Liaison group (SaLg).

<!-- Page 25 -->
4
4 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
• technology and engineering have facilitated big gains in patient safety, e.g.
pin-i ndexing of cylinders, mandatory SpO and capnography, advanced
2
intubating devices and ultrasound for vessel and nerve visualisation.
• Use of guidelines, protocols and good practice standards, e.g. National
Institute for health and Care excellence (NICe), Royal College
of anaesthetists (RCoa) and association of anaesthetists (aoa)
guidance. In the UK, the RCoa is leading the way with programmes
for excellence, such as anaesthesia Clinical Services accreditation
(aCSa), where participating anaesthesia departments measure their
performance against a robust set of standards.
• Outcome measures may be immediate (complication rate),
medium term (length of stay, 30d mortality) or long term (quality
of life improvements and functional improvement over 1y, National
emergency Laparotomy audit (NeLa)3). We improve what we measure
and what we measure must be important to the patient.
• Quality improvement, audit and research: a growing trend is where data
from small quality improvement projects conducted by local hospital
teams are pooled at a national level, thereby giving the data greater
validity. the National audit projects (Naps) and the Sprint National
anaesthesia projects (SNaps) have generated information on large
numbers of patients, giving evidence- based insight into deficits in care
and incidence of problems.4,5 the healthcare Quality Improvement
partnership is a huge resource of strategies for examining and instituting
best practice.
• Morbidity and mortality reviews are important, both locally and
nationally (e.g. National Confidential enquiry into perioperative Deaths
and the maternal morbidity and mortality reviews). they examine
themes that lead to harm and aid delivery of better care through
education, training and constant review.6,7
• there is increasing evidence that simulation-b ased team training
to improve technical and non- technical skills improves both team
performance and patient outcomes.8
• Coordinated, safe care requires high- quality handovers. there is
growing evidence that these can make a significant difference, not only
to patient morbidity, but also to mortality.
• Checklists have been shown to decrease human error, improve patient
safety and teamwork and increase the quality of care, e.g. the World
health Organization (WhO) checklist and checklists for handovers,
procedures and emergency situations.9
• patient education (e.g. joint schools) and assessment (e.g.
preassessment clinics) allow amelioration of risk through optimisation
and planning (for detail, see % pp. 49–52).
The WHO checklist
the WhO Second global patient Safety Challenge addressed surgical and
anaesthesia safety and looked at the evidence base behind surgical com-
plications. the result was a comprehensive clinical review and a 19- point
WhO Surgical Safety Checklist (fig. 1.1) intended to focus on key parts of
the surgical journey.10

<!-- Page 26 -->
LOOKINg afteR the patIeNt 5
//:ptth
M
.noitazinagrO
htlaeh
dlroW
eht
morf
noissimrep
htiw
decudorpeR
.tsilkcehC
ytefaS
lacigruS
noitazinagrO
htlaeh
dlroW
1.1
.giF
.9002
noitazinagrO
htlaeh
dlroW
©
fdp.tsilkcehC
_gne
_0958951429879
/9002
/snoitacilbup
/tni.ohw.codbilqhw

<!-- Page 27 -->
6
6 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
• It provides a framework to ensure that crucial steps are not omitted
in operating room care. It is a team communication tool and is not
intended as a tick- box exercise.
• the WhO checklist was trialled in four high- and four middle- and low-
income countries and resulted in a reduction in surgical complications
and mortality.11
• hospitals are encouraged to modify the checklist to reflect local
practice; eye surgery is different to cardiac surgery. Care should be
taken to avoid making it too complex or simplistic.
• Successful introduction of the WhO checklist requires a shift in theatre
culture where leadership from senior clinicians, nurses and allied health
practitioners is key.
Briefings and debriefings
team discussion before the start and end of an operating list improves com-
munication, teamworking, theatre efficiency, planning and patient safety. a
debrief at the end of the list allows the team to both acknowledge good
practice and identify areas requiring improvement.
• When briefing and debriefing are combined with the WhO Surgical
Safety Checklist, a strong safety culture is engendered (table 1.1).
Documentation
the general Medical Council (gMC) guidance on good medical practice
states that in providing care, the anaesthetist must keep clear, accurate, le-
gible and contemporaneous records that report the relevant clinical find-
ings, the decisions made, the information given to patients and any drugs
prescribed or other investigation or treatment.12
• good documentation in anaesthetic practice is essential for maintaining
excellent clinical care, facilitating handover of care between health care
professionals, aiding interspecialty communication and enabling patient
identification without risk or error.
• electronic patient and anaesthetic records are becoming more
widespread. In many ways, they improve patient safety, but they come
with their own set of problems. avoid ‘copying and pasting’ information,
as this can lead to errors. Be meticulous in saving records under your
name and protecting your passwords. electronic prescriptions should be
checked in the same vigilant manner you would apply if you were writing
the prescription. Do not assume a computer will prevent you from
prescribing the wrong drug at the wrong time in the wrong amount.
• previous anaesthetic charts are valuable resources for anaesthetists
during their preoperative assessment of patients. they are also useful
for education and retrospective clinical governance.
• the outcome of medicolegal cases is often dependent on the
anaesthetic record. an untidy, illegible, scantily completed chart may be
taken as indirect evidence of shoddy or inattentive care.13
• there is no standard anaesthetic record in the UK. however, the RCoa
and aoa have set out what they regard as the minimum data set for the
anaesthetic record.14

<!-- Page 28 -->
LOOKINg afteR the patIeNt 7
Table 1.1 Suggested components of briefing and debriefing
Briefing Introduction of team members and roles
patients and procedures planned
Confirmation of order of list
Specific equipment (anaesthesia and surgery)
required
any concerns relevant to the day
Debriefing thanks to team members for specific actions
factors that went well that were useful lessons
factors that could be improved for next time
Drug safety
anaesthetists are at high risk of making drug errors due to the frequency
and rapidity of drug administration. prospective data suggest errors may
occur in 1 in every 133 anaesthetics.15,16
• H any drug can be harmful if given in the wrong quantity, wrong
dilution or by the wrong route.
• the appearance of ampoules changes with alarming frequency as
hospitals reduce costs by sourcing the cheapest formulation. Do not
rely on pattern recognition. pay particular attention to ampoules of
drugs that look alike or sound alike.
• avoid distractions. Do not talk to someone else or allow other
distractions while drawing up drugs. Drug error is more likely when
fatigued, busy or distracted or when multiple anaesthetists work
together.
• Do not assume that the drug in the ampoule is the same as the drug
labelled on the outside of the box.
• Many drugs are available in different concentrations in the same hospital
(e.g. propofol, ketamine, heparin, insulin, atropine). Before drawing up
any drug, always check the generic name, concentration, volume and
expiry date on the ampoule, preferably with a second person.
• Label syringes immediately after drawing up a drug; do not put a syringe
containing a drug down until it is labelled.
• Consider a second person to check drugs prone to errors (potassium,
insulin, heparin, inotropes).
• If you have never given the drug before, or not by that route, check
with someone who has.
• always check controlled drugs. Sign for what you have given and what is
discarded.
• Dilution of medications for paediatric patients is very anaesthetist-
dependent (e.g. suxamethonium 50mg/m L or 10mg/m L, fentanyl
50 micrograms/m L or 10 micrograms/m L). Confirm with your team which
dilutions are being used and write these on the syringes clearly. It is easy
to make a mistake by a factor of 10 if you are in a rush. Work out doses
before the patient arrives and if in doubt, check with a second person.

<!-- Page 28 Table -->
| Table 1.1 Suggested components of briefing and debriefing |
| --- |
| Briefing Introduction of team members and roles patients and procedures planned Confirmation of order of list Specific equipment (anaesthesia and surgery) required any concerns relevant to the day Debriefing thanks to team members for specific actions factors that went well that were useful lessons factors that could be improved for next time |
|  |

<!-- Page 29 -->
8
8 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
• ISO26825 recommendations for pre- printed colour- coded labels should
be adhered to.
• ensure any writing on labels is legible and clear, particularly the
concentration of the drug in the syringe. Use standard units and
dilutions wherever possible.
• It is preferable to use tallman lettering (Box 1.1) to help differentiate
drug names that are similar. tallman lettering involves a combination of
upper and lower case lettering to emphasise key differences in drugs
with similar names.
• Where available, use special red-c oloured syringes to draw up muscle
relaxants.
• for high- risk drugs such as muscle relaxants, incorrectly timed
administration can be minimised by adding additional labelling covering
both the syringe and the sheathed drawing- up needle, such that this
additional label must be torn prior to administering the drug.
• additional ISO preprinted self-a dhesive labels can be placed on the
distal end of infusion lines to easily identify the drug being infused.
• H Avoid having drugs/ fluids poured into unlabelled pots onto a sterile
field, particularly when neuraxial or other regional procedures are being
performed. Drugs and 0.9% sodium chloride should be double-c hecked
and drawn up directly into a syringe with the aid of an assistant.
Completely separate chlorhexidine and other antiseptics from other
drugs that are being drawn up when preparing for neuraxial or regional
procedures.
• Drugs used for different routes of administration should be kept
separately.
• Do not administer a drug if you are unsure of what it is or its
concentration.
• It is good practice to check electronic postoperative orders twice or by
another person to ensure the correct patient and order has been given.
• admit errors; usually there is an opportunity to minimise harmful
effects and this should not be missed.
• Inform the patient of any error in a timely fashion and apologise. You
have a duty of candour.
there are multiple electronic safety systems being integrated into anaes-
thetic practice around the world to reduce drug error. for example, drugs
can be checked against allergies and comorbidities via radiofrequency or
barcoded drug labels which are scanned prior to administration. electronic
medical records can also reduce error by providing reminders for safe drug
dosages. Similarly, software has been integrated into drug delivery devices
such as ‘smart pumps’ which warn users when dosages fall out of safe
ranges and allow cross- checking with electronic patient data such as age,
allergies and comorbidities.
Box 1.1 Examples of Tallman lettering
• DOBUtamine • DOpamine
• epheDrine • epINephrine
• hydraLaZINe • hYDROmorphone
• fentaNYL • SUfentanil
• cefaLeXin • cefaZOLin

<!-- Page 30 -->
LOOKINg afteR the patIeNt 9
Vigilance and crisis management
anaesthetic emergencies may develop rapidly into life-t hreatening con-
ditions that cannot be managed effectively by an individual and require a
team response. In a theatre setting, the anaesthetist is likely to be the team
member with the specialist knowledge and skills to deal with the event. this
can give rise to intense pressure. always call for help early. a fresh pair of
hands and eyes is invaluable assistance, even if only to reassure you that you
are already dealing with the situation appropriately. Critical incident proto-
cols, cognitive aids and drills have been designed to aid in the management
of common and uncommon emergencies. Recognition of a problem is the
first step in any management strategy, and all members of a team should be
empowered to voice their concerns without fear of a derisory or dismissive
reception.
The unanticipated crisis
• H Declare problems clearly and early to the whole theatre team.
• H Call for help early.
• Resuscitation should be ongoing while you figure out the diagnosis.
• a repeated and systematic aBC approach helps render the patient ‘safe’
and buys thinking time.
• a good team leader is able to step back from the situation to consider
the whole picture. this can only be achieved through task delegation. It
is more effective if the leader knows the team members’ names (WhO
briefing), as well as their roles and expertise.
• Do not dwell on whatever or whoever ‘caused’ the crisis; use objective
and non- judgemental communication.
• to communicate effectively, your messages or commands must be:
• addressed: ask specifically named individuals to perform tasks
• heard: reduce background noise (e.g. turn off the radio)
• Understood: if you make a complex request, ask the recipient to
repeat it back to you (closed loop communication).
• If the cause of the problem is unknown, say so. Voice your thoughts
and reasoning and your team is more likely to be able to help you.
encourage others to contribute.
• Reappraise the situation regularly. Update the rest of the team with
new information.
• Often you will not be the team leader, but an equally valuable member
of the team nonetheless— a team player. a good team player is
adaptable, understands other team members’ roles, assumes complete
responsibility for delegated problems and feeds back information to the
rest of the team.
Handling serious events and conflict in theatre
Debriefing after adverse events in theatre is recognised as a tool to facili-
tate improved teamworking. a structured approach is often used and many
hospital trusts have teams to assist with these formal debriefs. You should
also seek personal support, contact your medical defence organisation and
identify any areas where training or return- to- work programmes may be
beneficial.

<!-- Page 31 -->
10
10 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
Bullying and conflict are detrimental cultures within health care.
Campaigns such as ‘Knock it Out’ within anaesthesia and ‘hammer it Out’
and ‘Cut it Out’ from our orthopaedic and surgical colleagues, respect-
ively, aim to create a positive workplace culture where individuals are
empowered to speak out against unacceptable behaviours and promote
exemplary behaviours. ‘Civility Saves Lives’ is a collective voice for the im-
portance of respect, professional courtesy and valuing each other.17
Keeping up- to-d ate
Continuing professional development refers to any learning outside of
undergraduate education or postgraduate training which helps doctors
to maintain and improve their performance. It covers the development of
knowledge, skills, attitudes and behaviours across all areas of a doctor’s
professional practice. It includes both formal and informal learning activ-
ities.18 Since 2012, all UK licensed doctors have to undertake 5-y early re-
validation to demonstrate to the gMC that they are up- to- date and fit to
practise. for trainees, this process is incorporated into the annual Review
of Career progression (or similar). Supporting information will include:
• a diary of CpD
• Quality improvement activities
• Significant events
• feedback on your practice from patients and colleagues
• Review of compliments and complaints.
Evidence-b ased medicine (EBM)
Defined as conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence
in making decisions about the care of individual patients. It teaches how to
ask a specific and relevant question arising from clinical practice, how to
access and critically appraise up- to- date knowledge (‘evidence’) (table 1.2)
and then, using clinical experience and judgement, how to determine
whether the evidence is applicable to a clinical setting. Use of proven ef-
fective treatments should improve patient outcome.
• eBM depends on well-d esigned studies producing reliable results, with
an emphasis on randomised controlled trials (RCts).
• Random assignment to treatment group and objective assessment of
outcome are the best methods of avoiding bias. a consistent finding
from several RCts is very convincing, and so the pooled results of such
trials constitute high- level evidence.
• Small RCts are prone to type 2 error— incorrectly accepting the null
hypothesis, and so a beneficial (or harmful) effect of treatment might be
missed.
• Large RCts are needed to provide sufficient study power to identify
effective treatments.
• Large, multicentre RCts and meta- analyses of numerous RCts can
include a broad range of patients and health care settings to better
reflect everyday clinical practice.
• Most studies in anaesthesia are too small to detect effective treatments
that can prevent adverse outcomes; too often, they focus only on
surrogate endpoints.

<!-- Page 32 -->
LOOKINg afteR the patIeNt 11
Table 1.2 Levels of evidence
Level Description
1 Meta- analysis of RCts (with homogeneity) or individual RCt
with narrow confidence interval
2 Low- quality RCt or cohort studies
3 Case- control study
4 Case series (and poor- quality cohort and case- control studies)
5 expert opinion or based on basic science research
Statistical analysis: the basics
Binary outcomes
the effect on binary outcomes (complication/n o complication) can be
summarised by the relative risk (RR) (table 1.3) or odds ratio (OR).
• RR is the probability of an event occurring in the exposed group vs
the non- exposed group. In order to use the RR which is based on the
incidence of an event, the exposure status of subjects must be known.
the probability (risk) of rolling a 6 on one die is 1/ 6.
• Odds is a different way of considering probability, comparing the
specified outcome against the remaining possible outcomes. In this
way, the odds of rolling a 6 on one die is 1:5, for 6 possible outcomes.
the OR is the ratio of the odds of an event occurring in the exposed
group vs the odds of it occurring in the non- exposed group. the OR
will approximate the RR for uncommon events but will otherwise
overestimate the risk and should be avoided if the RR can be used.
• an RR of 1.0 indicates no difference in risk between the groups being
compared. RR <1 d risk, and RR >1 i risk.
Numerical outcomes
Numerical outcomes (e.g. cardiac index or opioid consumption) can be
summarised as a weighted mean difference.
Table 1.3 Interpreting relative risk
Relative risk (RR) Effect on risk
0.25 75% reduction in risk
0.5 50% reduction in risk
1.0 No effect
1.5 50% increase in risk
2.0 100% (or 2- fold) increase in risk
p- values
a null hypothesis states that there is no relationship between the two
variables being studied and any discrepancy in results is due to chance, ra-
ther than being a significant finding. Levels of statistical significance are de-
scribed by the p-v alue. the smaller the p-v alue, the stronger the evidence
that the null hypothesis should be rejected. a p-v alue of 0.05 is taken as

<!-- Page 33 -->
12
12 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
expressing statistical significance (that there is only a 5% chance that the
results obtained are due to chance alone). p-v alues support research hy-
potheses by rejecting null hypotheses but cannot prove that the research
hypothesis is true.
95% confidence interval (CI)
the 95% CI is the range in which we can be 95% certain the true number
lies. the width of the CI indicates the precision or reliability of the estimate.
If either 95% confidence limit were the true effect, and if such a finding
would change the conclusion of the study, then we are left with uncertainty
regarding the outcome of the study.
How to interpret a meta-a nalysis
a systematic review is the process of analysing similar studies and a meta-
analysis is the statistical method used to pool those results. a meta-a nalysis
may be done using either a fixed effect model, which assumes that the indi-
vidual study results are correlated with one another and probably represent
similar study populations, or a random effects model, which does not require
this assumption. the latter should be used if there is study heterogeneity.
there are some weaknesses with a meta-a nalysis, e.g. publication bias
(negative studies are less likely to be published), duplicate/r epeated publi-
cation, heterogeneity and inclusion of outdated studies; they probably inflate
the risk of type 1 error (incorrectly rejecting a true null hypothesis). Meta-
analyses that have minimal heterogeneity, narrow CIs and a large number of
study events and that include at least one large RCt tend to be more reliable.
Forest plot: the basics
a forest plot can be used to graphically represent the individual studies con-
tributing to a meta- analysis.
fig. 1.2 summarises four trials comparing paravertebral block (pVB) with
epidural analgesia to reduce pulmonary complications. the pVB group in
column 1 is the intervention group and the epidural group in column 2 is
the control group.
• the estimated effect (in this case, RR) of each trial is represented by the
box and its 95% CI. the size of the box reflects the size of the study, and
this is quantified by the study weight (%). the horizontal lines through
the boxes illustrate the length of the CI. the longer the lines, the wider
the CI and the less reliable the study results. the vertical line is the
line of no effect (i.e. the position at which there is no clear difference
between the intervention group and the control group). If the CI crosses
the vertical line, then the individual study is not statistically significant.
• pooled data are represented by the diamond at the bottom, whose
area and width are also proportional to the pooled data size and 95%
CI, respectively. If the diamond touches the vertical line (RR of 1), the
overall combined result is not statistically significant.
• In this meta- analysis, the pooled RR is 0.41, indicating a 59% reduction
in risk of pulmonary complications in the treatment group (pVB),
compared to the control group (epidural). the CI of this estimated
RR ranges from 0.17 (83% risk reduction) to 0.95 (5% risk reduction),
which is weakly statistically significant (p = 0.04).

<!-- Page 34 -->
LOOKINg afteR the patIeNt 13
Fig. 1.2 example forest plot showing four trials comparing paravertebral block with
epidural analgesia to reduce pulmonary complications. See text for details. Source:
data from Davies Rg, Myles pS, graham JM (2006). a comparison of the analgesic efficacy and
side- effects of paravertebral vs epidural blockade for thoracotomy—a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Br J Anaes, 96, 418– 426.
Finding the evidence
Many helpful guides to performing literature searches are available on the
Internet. Medical librarians can also be helpful and may even perform a
literature search for you. a selection of useful literature search resources
is below.
Resources on EBM
• the Oxford Centre for evidence-B ased Medicine. how to practise
eBM. M http:// www.cebm.net
• Bandolier. premier eBM site with a focus on pain.
M http:// www.bandolier.org.uk
• the UK National Institute for health and Care excellence. produces
evidence- based clinical guidelines. M http:// www.nice.org.uk
• turning Research into practice (trip). Search engine linking databases of
systematic reviews. M http:// www.tripdatabase.com
Literature searches
• pubMed. free search engine accessing primarily the MeDLINe database.
M http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pubmed
• OvidSp. Medical literature platform giving access to medical databases
such as embase, Ovid MeDLINe and Cochrane.
Preappraised summaries of the evidence
• Cochrane Collaboration. global network of systematic reviews with links
to a teaching resource for meta-a nalysis. M http:// www.cochrane.org
• Database of abstracts of Reviews of effects (DaRe). evaluates the
effects of health care interventions and health service organisation and
delivery. It contains over 35 000 abstracts, reviews and protocols.
M http:// www.crd.york.ac.uk/ CRDWeb

<!-- Page 35 -->
14
14 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
• pROSpeRO. an international database of prospectively registered
systematic reviews. It aims to provide a centralised resource in which
proposed systematic reviews can be collated, so avoiding duplication.
M http:// www.crd.york.ac.uk/ pROSpeRO
Clinical trials and meta- analysis
• the James Lind Library. Collection of essays on the development of
‘fair tests of treatments’. M http:// www.jameslindlibrary.org

<!-- Page 36 -->
LOOKINg afteR YOURSeLf 15
Looking after yourself
H ‘first, do no harm’ begins with yourself.
Self- care and resilience
anaesthesia is a demanding occupation— from exams, shift work and
moving around for training rotations to the clinical challenges our pa-
tients pose and the need to maintain our skills and keep up-t o- date. It is
increasingly recognised that taking time for self- care is vital and building our
own resilience is required. We need to try to stay physically and mentally
healthy: exercise, a healthy diet, hobbies, social activities, awareness of po-
tential for addictive or destructive behaviour and seeking help when indi-
cated. all are easier said than done, and building a support network around
you is very important.
Recognising fatigue and burnout
the 2015 tragic death of an anaesthetic trainee driving home after a series
of night shifts prompted a national survey of fatigue in trainee anaesthe-
tists.19 this was followed by a 2018 survey of anaesthesia and critical care
consultants,20 showing the vast majority of respondents reported work-
related fatigue impacting on all areas of life.
the fight fatigue campaign recommends a shift in culture to ensure
awareness of the importance of guarding against fatigue in maintaining pa-
tient safety and staff well-b eing. this requires detection, education and pre-
vention. practical tips for anaesthetists on night shifts have been publicised
and improvements to rest facilities while on shift have been recommended.
Burnout is a syndrome characterised by depersonalisation, emotional ex-
haustion and loss of sense of achievement.21 the clinical symptoms and
signs of burnout are often non-s pecific and can include depression, irrit-
ability, insomnia, tiredness and anger. there are individual, environmental
and organisational risk factors for the development of burnout and tools
are available for practising clinicians to improve well-b eing, increase resili-
ence and reduce risk of burnout. Burnout is associated with significant mor-
bidity and mortality and the management of burnout syndrome involves a
multidisciplinary approach. Beware of signs of burnout or emotional dis-
tress in yourself and colleagues. If you are struggling, seek help urgently, and
if you know of someone else who is struggling, offer support.
Resources
• DocHealth is a confidential, not-f or- profit psychotherapeutic
consultation service for all doctors. It is delivered by consultant medical
psychotherapists based at BMa house in London.
M https:// www.dochealth.org.uk/
• Royal Medical Benevolent Fund provides financial help for medical
students, doctors and their families who are facing financial hardship.
M https:// rmbf.org/
• Practitioner Health Programme is an award- winning, free and
confidential NhS service for doctors and dentists with mental illness
and addiction problems who are working or looking to return to clinical
practice. M http:// php.nhs.uk/
• BMA support pages are devoted to well- being services and support.
M https:// www.bma.org.uk/ advice- and- support/ your- wellbeing#
wellbeing- support- services

<!-- Page 37 -->
16
16 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
• Doctor Support Service provides confidential phone and face-t o-
face support for doctors facing gMC fitness to practise hearings.
M http:// www.bma.org.uk/ support- at- work/ doctors- well- being/
doctor- support- service
• Doctors’ Support Network provides peer support group for doctors
with mental health concerns, including stress, burnout, mood and eating
disorders. M https:// www.dsn.org.uk/
• The Sick Doctors Trust is an early intervention programme for
addiction, which facilitates treatment in appropriate centres,
arranges funding for inpatient treatment and provides advocacy and
representation when required. M http:// sick- doctors- trust.co.uk/
• The Couch (doctors.net) this service is available to doctors registered
with doctors.net. there is a forum for mutual support and advice, with
the option of anonymous posting and a long list of doctors around the
UK happy to help colleagues in distress. M http:// www.doctors.net.uk
• Association of Anaesthetists wellbeing & support pages.
M https:// anaesthetists.org/ home/ Wellbeing- support
• Tea & Empathy is an online peer- to- peer support group.
M https:// www.facebook.com/ groups/ 1215686978446877;
twitter: @tea_ empathyNhS
Drug addiction and suicide in anaesthesia
anaesthesia can be an extremely rewarding, interesting and enjoyable
career, but it can also be stressful, exhausting and emotionally draining. the
relative availability of drugs of abuse means that unfortunately, anaesthe-
tists have one of the highest risks of developing a drug addiction and of
suicide. Care for your colleagues and care for yourself. If you are feeling
overwhelmed or disconnected, or you think a colleague may be at risk,
seek help. It is important that you comply with local guidance for recording
controlled drugs. If you suspect medications are going missing or someone
is showing signs of medication misuse, then you must report this to a se-
nior colleague. Do not confront anyone or speculate with others. the ease
of availability of these medications can be a burden and a temptation to
some; seek help from occupational health or your general practitioner (gp)
if needed.
The pregnant anaesthetist
Women make up a significant proportion of the anaesthesia workforce
and the number of ♀ anaesthetists likely to be working when pregnant
is increasing year- on- year.22 anaesthetic work poses certain risks to the
mother and fetus which are hard to quantify: anaesthetic agents, ionising
radiation, exposure to infections, manual handling, prolonged standing and
shift work.
Individual risk assessments should be completed for all pregnant anaes-
thetists, and those with pre-e xisting medical problems or pregnancy-r elated
complications will need greater input from their occupational health phys-
ician. Your department should support you while pregnant (e.g. reducing or
stopping on- calls, avoiding radiation, etc.).

<!-- Page 38 -->
LOOKINg afteR YOURSeLf 17
If you feel well during pregnancy, you should be able to do most things
normally, but you should not put yourself at risk or carry on working if you
are fatigued or unwell. Departments and training programme directors will
be grateful for early notification to allow them the maximum time to cover
your maternity leave.
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
employers have a duty to protect you from avoidable risks in the workplace.
H Keep yourself safe, first and foremost.
• Before undertaking any procedure, you should assess the likelihood
of exposure to potentially harmful agents and wear appropriate ppe.
there will be local policies to guide you. examples of ppe include:
gloves (sterile and non-s terile), aprons, masks of varying protection (e.g.
fluid- resistant, respirator, aerosol- resistant), laser goggles, lead shields,
aprons and radiation badges.
• ppe is only as good as the person putting it on. Make sure it is
appropriate for the task, fits you, you know how to don and doff it
correctly and you know how to dispose of it safely.
Blood and bodily fluid exposure
exposure to blood and bodily fluids is a daily hazard for the anaesthetist.
Develop safe practice from the very beginning of your career to minimise
your likelihood of inoculation injury. It is hard to change your habits later
in your career.
Prevention
ensure your vaccinations are up-t o- date; always wear ppe as per local pol-
icies, and dispose of sharps correctly.
Exposure
Broken skin or mucous membranes can be contaminated with blood or
bodily fluid. apply protective dressings to broken skin.
First aid
Remove the contaminant. If the skin is contaminated, wash with soap
and water. If the skin is breached, encourage bleeding if possible. Irrigate
contaminated mucous membranes with copious volumes of 0.9% sodium
chloride; then dry and cover if possible. Remove contact lenses if eyes are
contaminated. If in doubt about the seriousness of the injury, attend the eD.
Report
Report to your supervisor and fill out a Reporting of Injuries, Diseases
and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations (RIDDOR) form or your local
equivalent.
Risk assessment
Should not be done by the recipient (contaminated person). the type of
incident, infective state of the donor (usually the patient), lifestyle risks and
vulnerability of the recipient are all important. a hollow needle that breaks
the skin carries the greatest risk of transmission (1:3 hepatitis B, 1:30 hepa-
titis C, 1:300 human immunodeficiency virus (hIV)).

<!-- Page 39 -->
18
18 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
Occupational health
(Out of hours, notify the eD.) post- exposure prophylaxis may be required
(hepatitis B and hIV), and baseline bloods should be taken from the re-
cipient. a third party needs to obtain informed consent from the donor
before blood can be sent for testing.
Follow- up
this can be very stressful. follow- up with occupational health is important.
the recipient may be temporarily suspended from carrying out exposure-
prone procedures until transmission is confirmed as negative.
Manual handling
Look after yourself by using the correct equipment and technique and at-
tending any training offered. Do not compromise your safety or that of
your team or the patient for the sake of rapidity. It is usual for the anaes-
thetist to take charge of movement of the patient in theatre; use clear com-
mands to protect both the patient and staff from injury.
• the anaesthetist is responsible for protecting unconscious patients from
harm when they are being moved. pay attention to connected drips,
wires, airway tubing, catheter bags, surgical drains and other potential
hazards to avoid problems that can cause accidental injury to patients
or staff.
• If you are carrying an injury, contact occupational health for advice
before musculoskeletal injuries are exacerbated.
Anaesthetising colleagues and their relatives
During your career, you may be asked to anaesthetise a colleague, a friend
or their relative. the initial flattery of being approached is invariably re-
placed quickly by anxiety. It may be something you are expert in or do rou-
tinely, but the added stress of knowing the patient can be a potential hazard.
You may feel pressurised into doing something you would not normally do
at personal request or be less thorough with your consent, having assumed
understanding. Only agree if you feel happy to do so and if you have any
concerns, politely decline or ask for senior help. If you are faced with this
situation in an emergency, be aware of potential pitfalls; remain vigilant for
differences from your normal practice, and ask for senior help if needed.
Dealing with a complaint/ coroner’s inquest
Unfortunately, many of us will have to deal with a complaint, an investiga-
tion or a coroner’s inquest regarding aspects of our care during our careers.
this is an upsetting and stressful time and should not be faced alone. Seek
advice from colleagues, mentors and friends, along with your medical de-
fence organisation and your hospital’s legal team if needed.
• Sometimes the complaint occurs in your presence, but more often, it
is via written communication to a third party. Coroner’s inquests and
investigations may take many months or years to come to a conclusion,
during which time you may or may not be aware of the process.
• If you have any concerns about an event in which you have been
involved, or think there is a possibility further investigation may occur, it
is worthwhile contacting your medical defence organisation. Most have
a 24h helpline and the advice, support and reassurance they offer is very
helpful.

<!-- Page 40 -->
LOOKINg afteR YOURSeLf 19
• When you hear you are involved in a complaint/i nvestigation, inform
your supervisor or head of department.
• If you feel that the complaint/i nvestigation is having an adverse effect
on your ability to do your job, inform your supervisor immediately.
• a complaint should be answered promptly with an honest explanation
of the events. ask a senior colleague, member of the hospital legal team
or defence organisation to help you.
• Resolution of a complaint involves focus on the complainant’s needs;
offer a sincere apology, explanation/i nvestigation or assurance it will not
happen again. You should act fairly and openly and remain accountable
for, and reflect on, your actions. try to put things right if possible.
• If appropriate, apologise sincerely to the complainant—o ften this is all
that is needed. It is advisable for both parties to have a support person
present for any meetings. Document clearly what is said.
• If you are aware of a complaint, or are involved in an event that
may warrant further investigation, make comprehensive, factual and
contemporaneous notes. a list of personnel present is very useful. If it
has been some time since the event, ask to see the notes, but do not
make a copy; ensure you comply with data protection law.
• Your own separate contemporaneous record can differ from patient
notes by also containing your thoughts, feelings, conversations and
beliefs. these notes should contain no personal identifiers. Make as full
a record as possible, as early as possible, so you are able to refer back
at a later date. always review the data protection policies to ensure that
your record- keeping and storage comply with the law.
Further reading
aNZCa (2020). PS51. Guidelines for the safe management and use of medications in anaes-
thesia. M https://w ww.anzca.edu.au/s afety-a dvocacy/s tandards-o f-p ractice/p olicies,-
statements,- and- guidelines
Møller aM, Myles pS (2016). What makes a good systematic review and meta- analysis? Br J Anaesth,
117, 428– 30.
Newport M, Smith a (2015). Implementation of evidence-b ased practice in anaesthesia. BJA Educ,
15, 311– 15.
gregory p, edsell M (2014). fatigue and the anaesthetist. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 14,
18– 22. M https:// academic.oup.com/ bjaed/ article/ 14/ 1/ 18/ 336242
fleischer L (2013). Evidence Based Practice of Anaesthesiology, 3rd edn. philadelphia, pa: elsevier.
Burch D (2009). Taking the Medicine: A Short History of Medicine’s Beautiful Idea and our Difficulty
Swallowing it. London: Chatto & Windus.
References
1 the International Surgical Outcomes Study group (2016). global patient outcomes after elective
surgery: prospective cohort study in 27 low- , middle- and high- income countries. Br J Anaesth,
117, 601– 9. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aew316.
2 Reason J (1990). Human Error, 1st edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University press.
3 National emergency Laparotomy audit. M https:// www.nela.org.uk/
4 National audit projects. M https:// www.nationalauditprojects.org.uk/
5 health Services Research Centre. SNAP- 2 (EpiCCs). M https:// www.nationalauditprojects.org.
uk/ SNap- 2- epiCCS
6 National Confidential enquiry into patient Outcome and Death (NCepOD).
M https:// www.ncepod.org.uk/
7 National perinatal epidemiology Unit. MBRRACE-U K: Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk through
Audits and Confidential Enquiries across the UK. M https:// www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/ mbrrace- uk/
reports
8 higham h, Baxendale B (2017). to err is human: use of simulation training to enhance training and
patient safety in anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth, 119, i106– 14. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aex302

<!-- Page 41 -->
20
20 ChapteR 1 Good practice and safety
9 Saxena S, Krombach JW, Nahrwold Da, et al. (2020). anaesthesia-s pecific checklists: a system-
atic review of impact. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med, 39, 65– 73.
10 World health Organization (2009). WHO guidelines for safe surgery 2009. Safe surgery saves lives.
M http:// whqlibdoc.who.int/ publications/ 2009/ 9789241598552_ eng.pdf
11 haynes aB, thomas Wg, Berry WR, et al. (2009). a surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity
and mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med, 360, 491– 9.
12 general Medical Council (2013). Good medical practice. M https:// www.gmc- uk.org/ ethical-
guidance/e thical- guidance- for- doctors/ good- medical- practice
13 Utting Je (1987). pitfalls in anaesthetic practice. Br J Anaesth, 59, 888– 90.
14 the association of anaesthetists (2015). Standards of monitoring during anaesthesia
and recovery. M https:// anaesthetists.org/ home/ Resources- publications/ guidelines/
Standards- of- monitoring- during- anaesthesia- and- recovery
15 glavin RJ (2010). Drug errors: consequences, mechanisms, and avoidance. Br J Anaesth,
105, 76– 82.
16 Jensen LS, Merry af, Webster CS, Weller J, Larsson L (2004). evidence- based strategies for
preventing drug administration errors during anaesthesia. Anaesthesia, 59, 493– 504.
17 Civility Saves Lives. M https:// www.civilitysaveslives.com/
18 Royal College of anaesthetists. Revalidation for anaesthetists. M https:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/
training- careers/ working- anaesthesia/ revalidation- anaesthetists
19 McClelland L, holland J, Lomas Jp, et al. (2017). a national survey of the effects of fatigue on
trainees in anaesthesia in the UK. Anaesthesia, 72, 1069– 77. M https:// onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/ full/ 10.1111/ anae.13965
20 McClelland L, plunkett e, McCrossan R, et al. (2019). a national survey of out-o f- hours working
and fatigue in consultants in anaesthesia and paediatric intensive care in the UK and Ireland.
Anaesthesia, 74, 1509– 23. M https:// onlinelibrary.wiley.com/ doi/ full/ 10.1111/ anae.14819
21 View- Kim Wong a, Olusanya O (2017). Burnout and resilience in anaesthesia and intensive
care medicine. BJA Educ, 17, 334– 40. M https:// academic.oup.com/ bjaed/ article/ 17/ 10/ 334/
3865410
22 association of anaesthetists (2014). Occupational health and the anaesthetist. M https:// anaes-
thetists.org/ portals/ 0/ pDfs/ guidelines%20pDfs/ guideline_ occupational_ health_ anaesthe-
tists_ 2014_ final.pdf?ver=2018- 07- 11- 163755- 740&ver=2018- 07- 11- 163755- 740

<!-- Page 42 -->
Chapter 2 21
Preoperative
considerations
Tom Blincoe, Ian Densham and David Kotwinski
Better perioperative care 22
Preoperative assessment 23
Preoperative history 24
Preoperative examination 27
Preoperative investigations 28
Consultation models 31
Functional assessment 32
Risk assessment 36
Outcomes 39
Shared decision- making 40
Consent 41
Planning postoperative care 43
Enhanced recovery after surgery 44

<!-- Page 43 -->
22
22 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Better perioperative care
Perioperative medicine, also known as perioperative care, is the practice
of patient- centred, multidisciplinary and integrated medical care of patients
from the moment of contemplation of surgery until full recovery.1 the aim
is to reduce variation, increase patient satisfaction and improve outcomes.
• the number of surgical procedures performed each year is increasing.
Patients are older and more comorbid. they are undergoing more
major and increasingly complex procedures.2
• Perioperative medicine represents a concept of improved, more
efficient care using integrated care pathways that focus on patients at
the higher- risk end of the spectrum.
• the centre for perioperative care distinguishes four distinct episodes of
any perioperative pathway, each with key elements3 (Fig. 2.1).
Before surgery
Functional assessment
Risk prediction
Shared decision-making
During surgery
Standardised care pathways
Best practice evidence-based standards
Early after surgery
Enhanced recovery
Acute pain management
Higher-level care provision
Later after surgery
Enhanced communication with primary care
Increased vigilance for sequelae of periopera-
tive complications
Fig. 2.1 Key elements of any perioperative pathway.

<!-- Page 44 -->
PREOPERativE aSSESSmEnt 23
Preoperative assessment
all patients should be assessed prior to anaesthesia. there are two main
parts to a preoperative assessment.
For planned surgery:
• a nurse-l ed, protocol-d riven triage process may be the only assessment
for fit patients prior to surgery, or this may be followed by a face-t o-
face consultation with a preoperative specialist nurse.
• Less fit patients undergoing major surgery require a comprehensive
preoperative assessment. this should be performed by an anaesthetist
or a perioperative physician who will engage in a meaningful, shared
decision- making process.
• the second part occurs on the day of surgery. it involves a brief
systemic enquiry for new or progressive symptoms, a check of fasting
status, medications, allergies and a relevant examination.
• it is also an opportunity to discuss the planned anaesthetic technique, to
establish rapport and to alleviate concerns.
For emergency or urgent surgery in the patient with an unplanned admission:
• the two parts described above merge into a more focused risk
assessment.
Objectives of preoperative assessment
• take a full history.
• Perform an examination.
• Establish optimal management of concomitant disease.
• Establish functional status/e xercise capacity.
• Establish and discuss risk.
• Establish and discuss possible anaesthetic plans.
• Discuss concerns and expectations.
• Build rapport.
• Discuss immediate perioperative measures.
• Provide written information for further consideration.
• Document the process.
• Prevent cancellation on the day of surgery.
Further reading
there are robust guidelines for the delivery of preoperative assessment
services and recommendations for the management of comorbidities, avail-
able from the aoa, RCoa, niCE and the Preoperative association.4,5,6,7

<!-- Page 45 -->
24
24 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Preoperative history
Preoperative history taking in the preoperative assessment clinic should be
comprehensive and cover the following areas.
Anaesthetic history
• Previous adverse events related to anaesthesia
• airway difficulties (review of old charts)
• anaphylaxis
• Postoperative nausea and vomiting (POnv)
• Difficult vascular access
• Unplanned critical care admission
• Family history of anaesthetic problems
• malignant hyperthermia (mh) and suxamethonium apnoea.
Surgical history
• indication for current procedure
• Patient’s attitude towards condition
• Duration and progression of symptoms
• Effect of symptoms on the patient’s life
• trial of conservative measures/ alternative options
• Previous surgical procedures:
• may increase complexity/d uration of proposed procedure
• may have implications for regional anaesthesia/a nalgesia
• Will inform risk– benefit discussion.
Medical history
a systemic enquiry is necessary to identify symptoms where further treat-
ment or investigation may be required. Key areas of concern are:
Respiratory
(For detail, see % p. 164.)
• asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), obstructive
sleep apnoea (OSa)
• admissions and management of respiratory diseases
• Comparison of current and previous lung function tests.
Cardiovascular
(For detail, see % Chapter 5.)
• ischaemic heart disease (ihD), hypertension, pulmonary hypertension,
myocardial dysfunction, valvular disease, arrhythmias
• anaemia, previous transfusions and attitudes towards transfusion.
Endocrine
(For detail, see % Chapter 9.)
• Diabetes.

<!-- Page 46 -->
PREOPERativE hiStORy 25
Neurology
(For detail, see % Considerations for the older patient, pp. 89–94;
% Chapter 12; % Chapter 41.)
• acute or chronic pain
• Frailty and cognitive impairment
• Previous cerebrovascular event (CvE)/ transient ischaemic attack (tia)
and residual deficit.
Gastrointestinal
• Gastro- oesophogeal reflux disease (see % p. 58)
• nutritional status (see % p. 50; % p. 82).
Renal
(For detail, see % Chapter 7.)
• Level of impairment/ cause.
Musculoskeletal
• Considerations for positioning
• Considerations for regional anaesthesia.
Social history
• Occupation or retired occupation
• Family members, relationships and local support
• accommodation arrangements
• Level of independence and ability with activities of daily living
• alcohol consumption/ misuse
• Smoking
• Recreational/ illicit drug use.
Drug history and allergy status
• Record a full list of current medications and details of significant
historical use, e.g. recent steroids, disease-m odifying antirheumatic
drugs (DmaRDs) and chemotherapy.
• Careful perioperative management of certain medications, such as
anticoagulants and diabetic medications, is required (see % pp. 269–75;
% pp. 216–21).
• it is essential that instructions regarding medications are clear.
• most medications can and should be continued until the morning of
surgery.
• Be attentive for drugs that interact with anaesthetics (table 2.1).

<!-- Page 47 -->
26
26 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Table 2.1 Common drugs that interact with anaesthetic agents
Drug group Interaction
Cardiovascular system
angiotensin- converting enzyme Potentially severe hypotension
(aCE) inhibitors/ angiotensin
receptor blockers (aRBs)
β- blockers Severe hypotension ± bradycardia
Calcium channel blockers Severe hypotension, potential potentiation of
neuromuscular blockade (nmB)
Diuretics Electrolyte disturbance, potentiation of
arrhythmias
Central nervous system
anticonvulsants Liver enzyme induction
Benzodiazepines Potentiation of anaesthetic agents
tricyclic antidepressants (tCas) inhibition of catecholamine metabolism
monoamine oxidase inhibitors Potentiation of hypertension with vasopressors
(maOis)
Lithium Potentiation of non- depolarising nmB
Other
Steroids adrenocortical suppression (see % pp. 230–1)
aminoglycosides Potentiation of nmB
Oestrogens increased risk of venous thromboembolism
(vtE)

<!-- Page 48 -->
PREOPERativE ExaminatiOn 27
Preoperative examination
the completeness of the physical examination as part of a preoperative
assessment will depend on the patient and the procedure. the following
aspects of physical examination, however, are usually relevant.
General appearance
• Body habitus
• vital signs
• Fluid status
• nutritional status
• mobility/ aids.
Airway assessment
(For detail, see % pp. 363–7.)
• mouth opening/ mallampati score
• Jaw protrusion
• Dentition
• neck range of movement
• Facial hair.
Respiratory
(For detail, see % p. 164.)
• Presence of dyspnoea and/ or cyanosis
• medical interventions (oxygen (O), nebulisers, chest drain)
2
• Clarity of lung fields
• Scarring/ previous surgery.
Cardiovascular
(For detail, see % Chapter 5.)
• arterial pulses and rhythm
• vascular access options
• heart sounds
• Peripheral oedema
• Presence of cardiac implantable electronic devices.
Neurological
(For detail, see % Chapter 12.)
• any pre-e xisting deficit.
Musculoskeletal
• Range of movements relevant to positioning (e.g. shoulder joints for
proning)
• Examination of potential regional block sites.

<!-- Page 49 -->
28
28 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Preoperative investigations
• Preoperative investigations should be conducted according to individual
patient circumstances.
• national guidelines exist8 and should be taken into account to prevent
unnecessary tests and target those in whom investigations will inform
discussion of risk and support shared decision- making.
• Standardised referral pathways (with specific fitness for referral criteria)
between 1° and 2° care should minimise duplication of investigations.
• niCE guidelines8 make recommendations for investigations based on
the grade of surgery and american Society of anesthesiologists (aSa)
score (table 2.2). they also recommend the following:
• Pregnancy testing in all women with childbearing potential
• hba1c testing only if diabetic and no test within last 3mo
• no other tests should be offered routinely. these include chest x- ray
(CxR), urine dipsticks, resting echocardiography and tests for sickle
cell disease or trait.
Table 2.2 Recommendations for preoperative investigations
Grade of ASA grade
surgery
ASA 1 ASA 2 ASA 3/ 4
minor Consider renal
function in those at
risk of acute kidney
injury (aKi)
Consider
electrocardiogram
(ECG)
intermediate Consider Check renal
renal function and ECG
function Consider full blood
in those at count (FBC),
risk of aKi coagulation screen
Consider and lung function
ECG tests
major/ complex Perform FBC Perform FBC, Perform FBC, renal
Consider renal renal function function and ECG
function in those at and ECG Consider
risk of aKi coagulation screen
Consider ECG if and lung function
>65y tests
Specialist investigations
• Some specialist investigations and functional assessment (see %
pp. 32–5) may be performed at preoperative assessment clinic. Some
require referral.
• Detail on these investigations is provided in the relevant specialty
chapters. a brief overview is provided here.

<!-- Page 50 -->
PREOPERativE invEStiGatiOnS 29
Cardiac investigations
(See % Chapter 5, in particular pp. 104–5.)
Valvular disease
• Patients with clinically suspected valvular disease (> moderate stenosis
or regurgitation) should undergo preoperative echocardiography if
there is:
• no prior echocardiogram within 1y
• a significant change in clinical status or physical examination since the
last examination.
Assessment of left ventricular function
• d left ventricular (Lv) systolic function is associated with perioperative
complications, particularly postoperative heart failure.
• the association is greatest in patients with high predicted perioperative
mortality.
• in non-c ardiac surgery, consider echocardiography in patients who:
• have unexplained dyspnoea
• have known heart failure and worsening dyspnoea, or who have not
had assessment of their Lv function within 1y
• are potential candidates for solid organ transplant.
• Patients with significant Lv impairment should be referred for specialist
cardiology opinion and optimisation of cardiac function if urgency of
surgery allows.
Cardiac stress testing
• Echocardiography at rest will not detect stress- inducible ischaemia.9
• Exercise ECG or pharmacological stress testing has a high negative
predictive value for postoperative myocardial infarction (mi) or
cardiac death.
• Local variation will exist as to the type of stress testing preferred.
• if cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPEt) is available (and the patient
is able to exercise), then this should be considered, as it gives an
assessment of functional capacity and cardiorespiratory fitness. (For
CPEt, see % pp. 33–5.)
Cardiac implantable electronic device testing
• the function of cardiac implantable electronic devices should be
checked prior to surgery if this has not been done routinely within
12mo for permanent pacemakers or 6mo for implantable cardioverter–
defibrillators (iCDs).10
Respiratory investigations
(See % p. 164.)
Spirometry
• Spirometry has not been shown to be predictive of postoperative
outcomes.
• Preoperative spirometry can be used to:
• aid in the diagnosis of unexplained dyspnoea
• monitor lung function in those with known chronic lung disease
• assess lung function in patients with neuromuscular disorders
• Predict postoperative lung function in those undergoing lung resection
surgery.
