# Chapter 2: Preoperative Considerations

> 來源頁面: 51-100

---

<!-- Page 51 -->
30
30 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Lung ultrasound
• Particularly useful in the context of urgent and emergency surgery. its
uses include:
• Exclusion of pneumothorax
• assessment of lung parenchyma
• Diagnosis of pleural effusion.
Sleep apnoea screening
(For sleep apnoea, see % pp. 73–5; % p. 186.)
• Patients at high risk of OSa should be screened preoperatively.
Other
Gastric ultrasound
(For fasting, see % pp. 57–8.)
• the objective of point-o f- care gastric ultrasound is to aid decision-
making when planning an airway management strategy.
• it can be considered where there is uncertainty over the fasting status
of patients or where there may be delayed gastric emptying (e.g.
pregnancy, diabetes, pain, obesity, etc.).
• Gastric ultrasound has been shown to be highly sensitive (1.0) and
specific (0.975) to detect or rule out a full stomach.11
Further reading
american College of Cardiology (aCC) and american heart association (aha) (2014). 2014 ACC/
AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery. M http:// www.onlinejacc.org/ content/ accj/ 64/ 22/ e77.full.pdf?_ ga=2.166
163326.1996434336.1588937684- 1866901098.1588937684
European Society of Cardiology and European Society of anaesthesiology (2014). ESC/
ESA guidelines on non-c ardiac surgery: cardiovascular assessment and management.
M https:// www.escardio.org/ Guidelines/ Clinical- Practice- Guidelines/ ESC- ESa- Guidelines-
on- non- cardiac- surgery- cardiovascular- assessment- and- managem

<!-- Page 52 -->
COnSULtatiOn mODELS 31
Consultation models
Consultation models provide a structure for complex interactions that
occur between patients and doctors. they may also enable more effective
communication to take place. many consultation models exist. One that is
frequently applied to preoperative consultation is the Calgary– Cambridge
model.12 this consists of the following elements.
Initiating the session
• Preparation
• Establishing initial rapport
• identifying the reason(s) for the consultation.
Gathering information to explore the case fully
• Biomedical perspective (symptoms, signs, clinical investigations)
• Patient’s perspective
• Background information.
Building the relationship
• Using appropriate non- verbal behaviour
• Developing rapport
• involving the patient.
Providing structure to the consultation
• making the consultation organisation overt (summarising at the end of
a specific line of enquiry and progressing from one section to another,
using signposting and transitional statements)
• attending to flow (structuring the consultation in a logical sequence and
attending to timing).
Explanation and planning
• Providing the correct amount and type of information
• aiding accurate recall and understanding
• achieving a shared understanding and incorporate the patient’s
perspective
• Planning with shared decision-m aking.
Closing the session
• Ensuring appropriate point of closure
• Forward planning.
While these elements tend to be sequential, ‘building the relationship’ and
‘providing structure’ continue throughout the consultation.

<!-- Page 53 -->
32
32 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Functional assessment
• Evaluation of functional capacity is integral to preoperative risk
assessment; a fundamental prerequisite for safe perioperative care.
• Objective functional capacity assessments are required to support
preoperative risk stratification. Unfortunately, functional assessment
tools suffer from a paucity of evidence and a lack of unified definition
regarding the outcomes that are of most importance to patients (see %
p. 39).
• Subjective assessments have been shown to be less accurate at
identifying those with poor cardiopulmonary fitness or predicting
postoperative complications.13
• there are physical and non-p hysical functional assessment tests.
Tests of functional capacity
6- minute walk test (6MWT)
• Formal conduct of the 6mWt has been defined by the american
thoracic Society.14 it involves the patient walking as many laps as
possible in 6min of a flat, indoor 30m course.
• it has the advantage of being simple and cheap.
• Recent evidence suggests weak correlation between the 6mWt and
CPEt, and moderate correlation between the 6mWt and Duke activity
Status index (DaSi) scores.15
Exercise ECG and pharmacological stress testing
(See % pp. 104–5.)
• For the detection of myocardial ischaemia and identification of those
in whom percutaneous coronary intervention (PCi) or coronary artery
bypass grafting (CaBG) are indicated prior to major surgery.
• Exercise ECG also provides an indication of functional capacity.
• those with pre-e xisting ECG abnormalities may undergo
pharmacological stress testing or a myocardial perfusion scan.
Perioperative cardiac biomarker screening16
• there is likely a significant amount of undiagnosed/a symptomatic
perioperative myocardial ischaemia contributing to 30d mortality.
• Cardiac biomarker screening represents a promising alternative to,
or in conjunction with, other risk stratification methods to predict
postoperative cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
• tests consist of preoperative natriuretic peptides (brain natriuretic
peptide (BnP), n- terminal proBnP (nt- proBnP)) and early
postoperative troponins.
• Postoperative troponin surveillance may help identify high-r isk patients,
particularly those urgent and emergency surgical patients lacking
detailed preoperative investigation.
• Relatively simple, well- established medical risk reduction strategies
(including antiplatelets, statins, β- blockade and direct oral
anticoagulants) exist for those identified with abnormal results at high
risk of morbidity and mortality.
• Cardiac biomarker testing is less expensive and resource-i ntensive than
cardiac imaging, with promising predictive value for both cardiac and
non- cardiac morbidity and mortality.
• more evidence is required prior to widespread implementation.

<!-- Page 54 -->
FUnCtiOnaL aSSESSmEnt 33
Cardiopulmonary e xercise testing
• CPEt is a non- invasive, objective assessment of exercise capacity.
• it is a dynamic, integrated evaluation of the cardiorespiratory system
which reflects the physiological reserve of an individual and can be
helpful in predicting postoperative outcomes.
• CPEt is based on the premise that major surgery increases baseline O
2
consumption and that there is a correlation between reduced capacity
for O delivery and postoperative organ dysfunction.
2
• Consensus clinical guidelines on indications, organisation, conduct and
physiological interpretation of CPEt exist to standardise practice across
centres and to build on the existing evidence base.17
Indications for CPET
• Prognostication of surgical outcome
• to inform shared decision- making
• identification of patients suitable for prehabilitation
• to guide and monitor effects of preoptimisation
• to monitor effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy
• to guide intraoperative anaesthetic management
• to guide levels of postoperative care
• identification of pathology and causes of exercise intolerance.
Preparation and consent
• Patients should receive information on the rationale for testing, the
risks, benefits and the process itself.
• a full medical history should be taken, with detail on cardiorespiratory
comorbidity and medications.
• a pretest haemoglobin (hb) is necessary.
CPET equipment and the e xercise protocol
• the basic CPEt requirements are full resuscitation facilities, a cycle
ergometer, a metabolic cart and ancillary equipment for serial
monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation (SaO), non- invasive blood
2
pressure (niBP) and ECG. two staff members are advisable.
• the metabolic cart contains a calibrated gas analyser, a computer and
screens which display the continuous 12-l ead ECG with St- segment
analysis and graphical displays of the physiological changes occurring
during exercise.
• Gas flows and volumes are quantified by a pressure differential
pneumotachograph attached to the patient’s mouthpiece.
• an incremental ramp protocol is used up until the limit of exercise
tolerance is reached.
• a ramp slope (W/m in) is selected, using patient gender, age, height and
weight. it can then be adjusted according to comorbidity and functional
status to achieve a testing duration of between 8 and 12min of ramped
exercise (table 2.3).

<!-- Page 55 -->
34
34 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Table 2.3 Calculating work rate increment (W/ min)
Variable Unit Sex Formula
Peak vO mL/ min ♂ height (cm) – age (y) × 20
2
♀ height (cm) – age (y) × 14
vO unloaded mL/ min 150+ (6 × weight (kg))
2
Work rate increment = (peak vO2 – vO2 unloaded)/ 100
vO2 = O2 consumption.
Test conduct
there are four stages to an exercise test:
• Rest (3min):
• to record resting baseline data.
• Unloaded cycling (3min):
• For the patient to become accustomed to a cadence of 60/m in.
• Ramp exercise (8– 12min):
• Cycling continues until failure to maintain cadence of 60/m in.
• a Borg score (rating of perceived exertion) should be recorded.
• Recovery (5min):
• Cycling continues unloaded for a short period.
• monitor the patient until variables return to near baseline values.
Key exercise response variables17
three main variables of cardiorespiratory function are reported in relation
to surgical outcome. impairments in these indices are associated with an i
risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality following major non-c ardiac
surgery.
• vO peak in mL/ kg/ min is the highest O uptake (vO) achieved on
2 2 2
a rapid incremental test at end- exercise. it differs from vO max in
2
that it represents the patient’s best effort, rather than a physiological
endpoint. measured values are compared to predicted values to
determine abnormality:
• >80% predicted = not abnormal
• 71– 80% predicted = mildly reduced
• 51– 70% predicted = moderately reduced
• <50% = severely reduced.
• anaerobic threshold (at) in mL/ kg/ min. this is the vO above which
2
arterial lactate first begins to increase systematically during incremental
exercise, reflecting a metabolic switch to i glycolysis.
• a low at has a predictive value for morbidity and mortality in many
surgical cohorts, with a value of <11mL/ kg/ min widely used to
delineate higher-r isk patients.
• this value should be interpreted in the context of other variables and
the broader clinical picture, rather than used as an absolute threshold
for decision- making.

<!-- Page 56 -->
FUnCtiOnaL aSSESSmEnt 35
• ventilatory equivalents for carbon dioxide (vE/ vCO) are indicators
2
of ventilatory efficiency, representing the ratio of minute ventilation to
carbon dioxide (CO) output at any point in time.
2
• high values suggest hyperventilation and/o r i physiological
dead space.
• values >34 at at have been associated with adverse perioperative
outcomes.
Caution should also be applied to absolute values indexed to body weight
for vO peak and at, as they overestimate risk for patients with high body
2
mass index (Bmi) and underestimate risk for patients with a low Bmi.
Interpreting CPET reports
• more holistic reporting and interpretation of CPEt should guide
decision- making away from that based purely on thresholds of specific
exercise response variables.
• a CPEt report consists of an objective assessment of exercise capacity
and a more subjective review of the implications of this exercise
capacity for the suggested intervention.
• a CPEt report should be viewed alongside other risk assessment tools
to inform the shared decision- making process.
• the key elements of CPEt interpretation are as follows:17
• Determine the reason for the CPEt.
• Review the patient’s medical history and laboratory results.
• note the test quality–p atient effort ± reason for termination.
• Present data in tabular and graphical forms.
• Report exercise capacity using at and vO peak.
2
• Report other indices related to risk such as vE/ vCO.
2
• Evaluate the 1° cause of exercise limitation.
• Comment on perioperative risk implications and further investigations
advised.
Duke Activity Status Index
• the DaSi18 is a questionnaire which defines an individual’s exercise
capacity through the use of metabolic equivalents of task (mEts) where
1 mEt is the resting O consumption of 3.5mL/ kg/ min for a 40y old
2
70kg ♂ (Box 2.1).
• DaSi scores were the only assessment of functional capacity to be
associated with the 1° outcome measure of death or mi within 30d in a
large prospective cohort study.13
• Patients who cannot sustain 4 mEts of physical activity frequently have
adverse outcomes following high- risk surgery.
Box 2.1 Metabolic equivalents of common tasks
1– 4 mEts Eating, dressing, dishwashing, walking around the house
5– 10 mEts Climbing a flight of stairs, walking on level ground at
>6km/ h, running briefly, playing golf
>10 mEts Strenuous sports: swimming, singles tennis, football

<!-- Page 57 -->
36
36 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Risk assessment
• Surgical and anaesthetic intervention decisions are made by balancing
the benefits against the risks.
• the actual risks and benefits of any given intervention are unique to
individuals, the procedure, the type of anaesthesia and an individual’s
perception of what is risky and what a good outcome is.
• meaningful outcomes for individual patients should be central to any
discussion on risk and the context will guide specific risk disclosure.
• Risk assessment, shared decision- making (% p. 40) and informed
consent (% p. 41) are closely related, but distinct entities and should be
treated as such.
Estimating risk
• Reliably informing patients about risk remains a challenge.19
• accurate and early risk stratification to identify high-r isk patients
supports the introduction of targeted measures to reduce modifiable
risk via prehabilitation and optimisation, robust intraoperative
management plans and appropriate postoperative support.
• it is essential for minimising adverse outcomes and relies on high-q uality
data at individual, institutional and national levels.
• it empowers patients and informs shared decision-m aking, facilitates
communication and underpins the legal consent process.
• there are a variety of tools for risk assessment. they vary widely in
their ease of use, accuracy and what cohort or risk they refer to.
• the process of risk assessment has been shown to positively influence
patients’ care, regardless of level of risk.20
Risk can be estimated using
• Biomarkers (see % p. 32; % p. 104)
• Functional assessment (see % pp. 32–5)
• Risk assessment tools:
• Scoring systems such as aSa, Lee’s Revised Cardiac Risk index
and the assess Respiratory Risk in Surgical Patients in Catalonia
(aRiSCat) risk index
• Prediction models such as Surgical Outcome Risk tool (SORt),
Portsmouth- Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the
enUmeration of mortality and morbidity (P- POSSUm), the national
Emergency Laparotomy audit (nELa) risk prediction tool and
the american College of Surgeons national Surgical Quality
improvement Programme (aCS nSQiP).
• improving risk estimation tools, so that they predict outcomes that are
important to patients, remains a key challenge.
• Being able to predict outcomes that are meaningful to patients will
facilitate more informed decision- making prior to surgery.

<!-- Page 58 -->
RiSK aSSESSmEnt 37
Discussing risk
• Disclosure of risk has changed (following montgomery vs Lanarkshire
health Board21) from the practice of medical professionals informing the
patient of what they consider to be appropriate, to what a reasonable
patient would want to know.
• this reflects the legal and moral shift away from paternalism towards
autonomy and self- determination with respect to decision-m aking about
health.
• Clinicians need to explore what patients consider to be relevant:
• it may not be appropriate to detail very serious, very rare
complications to a young, fit patient having a minor procedure, but
this should not be assumed.
• the focus of discussion for an elderly, comorbid patient listed for
major complex surgery would likely focus on survival benefit and
complications that may lead to loss of independence or a decline in
functional status. this, however, cannot be assumed.
• ideally, comprehensive written information ± direction to online
resources should be provided and documented.
• the entire risk conversation is subject to bias and interpretation.
• Clinicians should seek to minimise such influences and support patients
in their decision- making by providing them with information which is
tailored to their individual needs.
• Factors that may alter the perception of a given risk include:
• Exposure bias: under- or over- publicity
• Regional bias: geographical variation
• Severity: anxiety and fixation on serious complications, or serious
events perceived as higher risk, despite rarity
• vulnerability: denial, ‘it won’t happen to me’
• Controllability: more accepting of risk, more understanding of
complications
• Certainty: knowledge and understanding of events
• Familiarity: experience of prior interventions
• Presentation: spin on absolute vs relative risks, positive vs negative
presentation of numbers, e.g. ‘90% survival’ rather than ‘10%
mortality’.
• Words, pictures or numbers can be used to communicate risk.
• Evidence suggests considerable variation in the numerical translation of
verbal probability expressions such as ‘negligible’, ‘low’, ‘moderate’ and
‘high’ risk.22
• Patient leaflets and clear information, including an infographic of
anaesthetic risks and probability phrases, are available on the RCoa
website.23 (See table 2.4 for summary.)

<!-- Page 59 -->
38
38 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Table 2.4 Common events and risks in anaesthesia
Very common: > in 0
Equivalent to one person in your family
Shivering >1 in 10
temporary memory loss (mainly in over 60s) >1 in 10
Sickness >1 in 10
thirst >1 in 10
Sore throat >1 in 10
Bruising >1 in 10
Common: between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100
Equivalent to one person in a street
Pain at the injection site >1 in 10 <1 in 100
minor lip or tongue injury >1 in 10 <1 in 100
Uncommon: between 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000
Equivalent to one person in a village
minor nerve injury >1 in 100 <1 in 1000
Rare: between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10 000
Equivalent to one person in a small town
Peripheral nerve damage that is permanent 1in 000
Corneal abrasion 1in 2,800
Damage to teeth requiring treatment 1in 4500
anaphylaxis (severe allergic reaction to a drug) 1in 10 000
Very rare: between 1 in 10 000 to 1 in 100 000 or more
Equivalent to one person in a large town
awareness during an anaesthetic 1in 20 000
Loss of vision 1in 100 000
Death as a direct result of anaesthesia 1in 100 000
Source: data from Common events and risks in anaesthesia infographic, Royal College of
anaesthetists (M rcoa.ac.uk/ media/ 1946)23

<!-- Page 60 -->
OUtCOmES 39
Outcomes
• audit, quality improvement and research can be used to review and
analyse patient outcome data to improve patient care.
• Routinely collecting patient outcome data and using these to guide
local practice is increasingly widespread in UK centres. For example,
Patient Reported Outcome measures (PROms) following hip and knee
replacement surgery have been collected since 2009.
• measurement of outcome after surgery is essential. Well-d efined
outcome measures enable comparison between interventions, individual
practitioners and institutions, and enhance risk stratification.
• Outcome measures can be considered as either clinical outcomes or
patient- reported outcomes.
• Clinical outcomes include mortality and morbidity; 30d and 1y mortality
are routinely and relatively easily collected.
• morbidity has a much higher prevalence than mortality in the general
surgical population and can be assessed using various tools such as
the Postoperative morbidity Survey (POmS)24 or the Clavien- Dindo
classification.25
• Recent emphasis has focused on the use of patient-r eported outcomes
as the more traditional and crude measures, such as 30d mortality,
unsurprisingly fail to adequately determine the impact of interventions
on patients’ lives.
• there is a need for more meaningful measures that occur more
frequently such as short- term complications and longer- term mortality.
• more common outcomes also yield more statistically meaningful
comparisons.26
• the Perioperative Quality improvement Programme (PQiP)27 was
established in 2016 and aims to look at perioperative care of patients
undergoing major non- cardiac surgery. it measures complication rates,
failure to rescue and patient-r eported outcomes. Participating hospitals
are provided with a live dashboard of their results, along with quarterly
and annual reports.
• the Standardised Endpoints in Perioperative medicine (StEP) initiative
aims to define measures used in future studies to enable comparison
between studies and consolidate the evidence base.28

<!-- Page 61 -->
40
40 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Shared decision- making
• the context in which clinical decisions are made is wide-r anging.
• Patients vary considerably in their attitudes towards their health, their
ability to make informed decisions and their understanding of options
and possible outcomes of those options.
• the legal and moral landscape in which health care decisions are made
is also changing (see % Risk assessment, pp. 36–8).
• if possible, establish patients’ values and preferences, as these should
determine the significance of various risks.29
• Shared decision- making is the process in which clinicians and patients
work together to select tests, treatments, management or support
packages using both clinical evidence and the patient’s informed
preferences.30
Essential components of shared decision- making include:
• Reliable, balanced, evidence- based information that outlines options,
outcomes and uncertainties
• Decision support counselling with a clinician to clarify options and
preferences
• Recording, communicating and implementing patient preferences
• Shared decision- making recognises two forms of expertise, as shown in
Box 2.2.30
Box 2.2 Sharing expertise
Clinician’s expertise Patient’s expertise
• Diagnosis • Experience of illness
• Disease aetiology • Social circumstances
• Prognosis • attitude to risk
• treatment options • values
• Outcome probabilities • Preferences
Reproduced with permission from Coulter & Collins , making Shared Decision-making a Reality:
no decision about me, without me (M https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/making-
shared-decision-making-reality), © the King’s Fund 2011.
Decision aids
• most clinical decisions are not straightforward, with multiple options
and outcomes as possibilities. Just as clinicians are supported by clinical
guidelines, patients also require decision aids.
• Decision aids are tools that not only provide information on options,
but also help patients to decide which option to choose.
• Examples of decision aids include the following, with guidelines for
assessing the quality of any given resource: patient information sheets,
computer programs, smart phone or social media applications,
interactive websites and filmed patient/ clinician interviews.31
• the use of decision aids has been shown to result in: greater knowledge
and understanding, more accurate risk perception, greater comfort
with decisions, less regret with complications, better adherence to
treatment, no increase in anxiety and fewer patients choosing major
surgery.32

<!-- Page 62 -->
COnSEnt 41
Consent
• the legal stance on consent is changing, and professionals need to keep
abreast of evolving legal developments in the jurisdiction in which they
practise.
• the key principles of biomedical ethics, autonomy and self-
determination require clinicians to obtain consent prior to medical
intervention.
• health professionals who carry out procedures without valid consent
are liable to legal action and investigation by professional bodies.33
Guidance on the process of consent34,35
• information should be:
• Provided as early as possible
• Written or online for future reference
• tailored to the individual.
• Discussion should:
• include risks, benefits and alternatives
• include opportunity for questions
• Be fully documented.
• Exceptions to the requirement for providing information:
• Patients consistently express desire not to know
• informing the patient would pose a serious threat
• Emergency treatment in the patient’s best interests.
• in the UK, separate written consent is not required for anaesthesia
for another procedure, although it is recommended for independent
procedures.
• Consent is an ongoing process and should be obtained by either the
individual performing the procedure or a suitable delegate. it may
require repeated discussion and/ or confirmation, with documentation
at every stage.
• Patients can qualify consent by refusing aspects of treatment.35
Capacity
• valid consent requires that the patient has capacity.
• to have capacity for consent, the patient must understand and recall
the information provided, weigh up the risks and benefits, consider the
consequences of not having the procedure and communicate a decision
without coercion.
• it is the responsibility of the clinician obtaining the consent to establish
whether or not an individual has capacity.
• Capacity is not absolute. it is time- and decision- specific, and is subject
to change.
• the mental Capacity act (mCa) 200536 sets out the action required
by law when a patient over the age of 16y lacks capacity. the main
principles of the mCa 2005 are that an individual must:
• Be assumed to have capacity unless proven otherwise
• Be given all practicable help to make a decision before being treated
as lacking capacity
• not be treated as lacking capacity merely because they make an
unwise decision.

<!-- Page 63 -->
42
42 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
• an intervention or decision made on behalf of a person lacking
capacity must:
• Be in their best interests
• Cause the least restriction of their rights and freedom of action to
achieve the stated purpose.
Best interests
• acting in a patient’s best interests involves consideration of social,
psychological and medical factors, and must be guided by the patient’s
own opinions, if possible.
• Family or close friends should be consulted, although this should not
compromise care if emergent.
• the independent mental Capacity advocacy Service (imCaS) can
provide support for patients without friends or family in England and
Wales.36
• many competent individuals anticipate a loss of capacity in the future
and legally binding advance decisions (advance directives or living wills)
can be written which specify refusal of certain life-s ustaining treatment
in the event of incapacity.
• alternatively, individuals may have made a Lasting Power of attorney
(LPa), a legal document appointing a person with capacity to act on
their behalf with health decisions, should they lose capacity in the future
(England and Wales).35
Children and young people
(See also % p. 915.)
• Competent young people (16 and 17y olds) can give consent for
any treatment without obtaining separate consent from a parent or
guardian.
• those under 16y who demonstrate that they fully appreciate the risks
and benefits of the planned intervention can also give consent.
• On the other hand, children and young people who refuse treatment
may have their decision overridden by a parent or the court if they are
likely to suffer irreversible harm as a result of their refusal.
• When a child lacks capacity for consent, parental consent should
be sought. if such a child refuses treatment, judgement needs to be
exercised by the parent and the doctor as to the level of restraint that is
acceptable. When faced with a child who is uncontrollable for whatever
reason, the anaesthetist should consider postponing the case until
adequate premedication can be given.35
Qualified consent
• Qualified consent applies to patients who, for religious or personal
reasons, may consent to treatment in general but refuse certain aspects
of this treatment, e.g. Jehovah’s Witness patients who refuse blood
transfusion (see % p. 462).35 the details of the exact nature of the
patient’s restriction and the explanation of the risks should be carefully
documented.

<!-- Page 64 -->
PLanninG POStOPERativE CaRE 43
Planning postoperative care
• Crucial to preoperative planning is anticipating postoperative needs and
where those needs will be best met.
• about 80% of surgery is done on ambulatory, day case pathways, but
for more complex operations and comorbid patients, inpatient care is
required.
• Local variation exists, but preoperative predicted mortality of >5%
should warrant consideration of higher levels of postoperative care
(table 2.5).
• intraoperative complications or unexpected findings may mean a patient
requires a higher level of care than predicted preoperatively.
• Early communication with the surgical team, bed management and
clinicians responsible for higher- level care is recommended to ensure
patients’ care needs are met.
Table 2.5 Levels of postoperative care
Level Description
0 Patients whose needs can be met through normal ward care in an
acute hospital
1 Patients at risk of their condition deteriorating, or those recently
relocated from higher levels of care whose needs can be met on an
acute ward, with additional advice and support from the critical care
team
2 Patients requiring more detailed observation or intervention, including
support for a single failing organ system or postoperative care and
those ‘stepping down’ from higher levels of care
3 Patients requiring advanced respiratory support alone or basic
respiratory support, together with support of at least two organ
systems. this level includes all complex patients requiring support for
multiorgan failure

<!-- Page 64 Table -->
| Table 2.5 Levels of postoperative care |
| --- |
| Level Description |
| 0 Patients whose needs can be met through normal ward care in an acute hospital 1 Patients at risk of their condition deteriorating, or those recently relocated from higher levels of care whose needs can be met on an acute ward, with additional advice and support from the critical care team 2 Patients requiring more detailed observation or intervention, including support for a single failing organ system or postoperative care and those ‘stepping down’ from higher levels of care 3 Patients requiring advanced respiratory support alone or basic respiratory support, together with support of at least two organ systems. this level includes all complex patients requiring support for multiorgan failure |
|  |

<!-- Page 65 -->
44
44 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
Enhanced recovery after surgery
• Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERaS) is the name given to a
programme that is designed to get patients back to normal health as
quickly as possible after major operations.
• all patients undergoing major surgery should follow an appropriate
ERaS programme.
• it is an evidence-b ased approach to the perioperative pathway that has
been shown to improve outcomes and d length of hospital stay. (See
Box 2.3 for the key ERaS principles.)
• the details of individual ERaS pathways vary, depending on the type of
surgery and local needs. Example pathways are available on the ERaS
society website.37
Box 2.3 Key ERAS principles
• Patient preparation and counselling
• Optimisation of nutrition and minimisation of fasting times
• Standardised anaesthetic and analgesic regimes
• Regional and neuraxial techniques to minimise opioid usage
• minimally invasive surgery and d use of nasogastric tubes (nGts)
and drains
• Early mobilisation and enteral nutrition
Ongoing care
• the surgical team is responsible for patients not requiring higher-l evel
care once they leave the recovery area.
• an anaesthetist must be available to review and provide advice for
patients with any problems/ complications potentially related to
anaesthesia and related procedures.
Enhanced postoperative care
• Centres in the UK are now setting up enhanced care areas that provide
care between levels 1 and 2 (sometimes called ‘level 1.5 units’) for
those higher- risk patients who do not require admission to a high
dependency unit (hDU) but need a level of support higher than that
offered on a ward.
• Enhanced care is a relatively new and evolving concept, with the aim of
providing a higher level of observation, monitoring and interventions
than on the general ward.
• Enhanced advice and support from the critical care team should be
more easily accessible.
• Patients are under the combined care of the anaesthetic and
surgical teams.

<!-- Page 66 -->
EnhanCED RECOvERy aFtER SURGERy 45
References
1 Centre for Perioperative Care. M https:// cpoc.org.uk
2 Fowler aJ, abbott tEF, Prowle J, et al. (2019). age of patients undergoing surgery. Br J Surg, 106,
1012– 18.
3 Royal College of anaesthetists (2015). Perioperative medicine: the pathway to better surgical
care. M https:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ sites/ default/ files/ documents/ 2019- 08/ Perioperative%20
medicine%20- %20the%20Pathway%20to%20Better%20Care.pdf
4 association of anaesthetists (2010). Pre- operative assessment and patient preparation – the role
of the anaesthetist. M https:// anaesthetists.org/ home/ Resources- publications/ Guidelines/
Pre- operative- assessment- and- patient- preparation- the- role- of- the- anaesthetist- 2
5 Royal College of anaesthetists (2017). Risk explained. M https:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ patient-
information/ patient- information- resources/ anaesthesia- risk/ risk- explained?mini=2017- 12
6 national institute for health and Care Excellence. Improving health and social care through
evidence- based guidance. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/
7 the Preoperative association. M https:// www.pre- op.org/
8 national institute for health and Care Excellence (2016). Routine preoperative tests for elective
surgery. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng45
9 Sicari R, nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista a, et al. (2009). Stress Echocardiography Expert
Consensus Statement— Executive Summary: European association of Echocardiography (EaE)
(a registered branch of the ESC). Eur Heart J, 30, 278– 89.
10 Bryant hC, Roberts PR, Diprose P (2016). Perioperative management of patients with cardiac
implantable electronic devices. BJA Educ, 16, 388– 96.
11 Kruisselbrink R, Gharapetian a, Chaparro LE, et al. (2019). Diagnostic accuracy of point- of- care
gastric ultrasound. Anesth Analg, 128, 89– 95.
12 Kurtz Sm, Silverman JD (1996). the Calgary– Cambridge Referenced Observation Guides: an aid
to defining the curriculum and organizing the teaching in communication training programmes.
Med Educ, 30, 83– 9.
13 Wijeysundera Dn, Pearse Rm, Shulman ma, et al. (2018). assessment of functional capacity be-
fore major non- cardiac surgery: an international, prospective cohort study. Lancet, 391, 2631– 40.
14 american thoracic Society (2002). ATS statement: guidelines for the six-m inute walk test. M
https:// www.thoracic.org/ statements/ resources/ pfet/ sixminute.pdf
15 Shulman ma, Cuthbertson Bh, Wijeysundera Dn, et al. (2019). Using the 6-m inute walk test to
predict disability- free survival after major surgery. Br J Anaesth, 122, 111– 19.
16 Ruzycki Sm, Prystajecky m, Driedger mR, et al. (2020). Peri- operative cardiac biomarker
screening: a narrative review. Anaesthesia, 75, e165– 73. doi:10.1111/ anae.14920
17 Levett DZh, Jack S, Swart m, et al. (2018). Perioperative cardiopulmonary exercise testing
(CPEt): consensus clinical guidelines on indications, organization, conduct, and physiological in-
terpretation. Br J Anaesth, 120, 484– 500.
18 hlatky ma, Boineau RE, higginbotham mB, et al. (1989). a brief self administered questionnaire
to determine functional capacity (the Duke activity Status index). Am J Cardiol, 64, 651– 4.
19 Royal College of anaesthetists (2019). Perioperative Quality Improvement Programme (PQIP) Annual
report 2018– 19. M https:// pqip.org.uk/ pages/ ar2019
20 national Emergency Laparotomy audit (2019). The Fifth Patient Report of the National Emergency
Laparotomy Audit. M https:// www.nela.org.uk/ reports
21 UK Supreme Court (UKSC) (2015). Montgomery (Appellant) v Lanarkshire Health Board
(Respondent) (Scotland) UKSC 11. M https:// www.supremecourt.uk/ cases/ uksc- 2013- 0136.
html
22 Wiles mD, Duffy a, neill K (2020). the numerical translation of verbal probability expressions
by patients and clinicians in the context of peri- operative risk communication. Anaesthesia, 75,
e39– 45.
23 Royal College of anaesthetists. Patient information resources: risk explained. M https:// www.rcoa.
ac.uk/ patient- information/ patient- information- resources/ anaesthesia- risk/ risk- explained
24 Grocott mP, Browne JP, van der meulenm J, et al. (2007). the Postoperative morbidity Survey
was validated and used to describe morbidity after major surgery. J Clin Epidemiol, 60, 919– 28.
25 Dindo D, Demartines n, Clavien Pa (2004). Classification of surgical complications: a new pro-
posal with evaluation in a cohort of 6336 patients and results of a survey. Ann Surg, 240, 205– 13.
26 myles PS, Boney O, Botti m, et al. (2018). Systematic review and consensus definitions for the
Standardised Endpoints in Perioperative medicine (StEP) initiative: patient comfort. Br J Anaesth,
120, 705– 11.
27 Perioperative Quality improvement Programme. M https:// pqip.org.uk/ content/ home

<!-- Page 67 -->
46
46 ChaPtER 2 Preoperative considerations
28 moonesinghe SR, Jackson ai, Boney O, et al. (2019). Systematic review and consensus definitions
for the Standardised Endpoints in Perioperative medicine initiative: patient- centred outcomes. Br
J Anaesth, 123, 664– 70.
29 Sturgess J, Clapp Jt, Fleisher La (2019). Shared decision- making in perioperative medicine: a
narrative review. Anaesthesia, 74, 13– 19.
30 the King’s Fund (2011). Making shared decision- making a reality: no decision about me, without me.
M https:// www.kingsfund.org.uk/ publications/ making- shared- decision- making- reality
31 Elwyn G, O’Connor am, Bennett C, et al. (2009). assessing the quality of decision support tech-
nologies using the international Patient Decision aid Standards instrument (iPDaSi). PLoS One, 4,
e4705. M https:// doi.org/ 10.1371/ journal.pone.0004705
32 O’Connor am, Stacey D, Entwistle v, et al. (2017). Decision aids for people facing health treat-
ment or screening decisions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 4, CD001431.
33 Department of health (2009). Reference guide to consent for examination or treatment, 2nd edn.
M http:// webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ 20130107105354/ http:// dh.gov.uk/ prod_
consum_ dh/ groups/ dh_ digitalassets/ documents/ digitalasset/ dh_ 103653.pdf
34 General medical Council (2008). Dcisions making and consent. M https:// www.gmc- uk.org/
ethical- guidance/ ethical- guidance- for- doctors/ consent
35 yentis Sm, hartle aJ, Barker iR, et al. (2017). aaGBi: consent for anaesthesia 2017. Anaesthesia,
72, 93– 105.
36 mental Capacity act 2005 (2005). Chapter 9: Lasting powers of attorney. M http:// www.legisla-
tion.gov.uk/ ukpga/ 2005/ 9/ contents
37 ERaS® Society. M https:// erassociety.org/ guidelines/ list- of- guidelines/

<!-- Page 68 -->
Chapter 3 47
Preoptimisation
Tom Blincoe, David Kotwinski, and Ian Densham
Preoptimisation 48
Prehabilitation 49
Patient blood management, anaemia and iron deficiency 53
Fasting 57
Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis 59
Antibiotic prophylaxis 62
Perioperative medications 64
Herbal medicines and anaesthesia 65
Premedicants 66

<!-- Page 69 -->
48
48 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Preoptimisation
the role of the preoperative team has evolved over the past decade and
the focus is now not only on assessment, but also on patient optimisation.
this is where a collaborative approach is taken to get patients as fit for sur-
gery as possible in the time frame available.
Preoptimisation includes both lifestyle and medical optimisation of
comorbidity. the preoperative team works together with hospital special-
ists and GPs to identify and minimise risk factors for postoperative compli-
cations. With the facts, patients are then empowered to be fully involved in
shared decision- making.
Patients’ attitudes towards surgery are likely to shift in the future. Far
from being passive participants on the ‘conveyor belt’ to surgery, patients
are being encouraged to motivate and engage in physical and psychological
training, so as to ‘get fit’ for their operations, an approach analogous to how
an athlete would prepare for a marathon.

<!-- Page 70 -->
PreHAbilitAtion 49
Prehabilitation
Habilitation is derived from the latin ‘habilitare’, meaning ‘to make suitable’
or ‘to enable’. Prehabilitation is the practice of enhancing a patient’s func-
tional capacity before surgery, with the aim of improving postoperative out-
comes (Fig. 3.1).1 this may include lifestyle and nutritional advice, structured
physical exercise and psychosocial support.
Physical exercise
Physical inactivity is one of the leading risk factors for death worldwide
(WHo, 2018). in 2015/ 16, 26% of UK adults were classified as inactive
(<30min of physical activity per week).
• there is extensive evidence that exercise prolongs life and reduces CVS
disease in a dose- related fashion.
• A sedentary lifestyle is associated with twice the risk of premature
death, compared to physically active people.2
• Patients should be encouraged to undertake a minimum of 150min of
moderate exercise or 90min of vigorous exercise per week.
• Social prescribers can signpost patients to local physical activity
initiatives. GPs may be able to prescribe free or subsidised gym
memberships.
• Well- designed studies have demonstrated that preoperative exercise
can improve exercise capacity.
• there is limited evidence to suggest preoperative exercise programmes
reduce length of stay and postoperative pain and improve physical
function following major surgery.3
• large multicentre rCts are under way, aiming to demonstrate a
reduction in morbidity and mortality.
• exercise programmes need to be tailored to individual patients,
according to baseline fitness levels and the time frame available.
Psychological support
there may be a role for preoperative psychological support in those at risk
of developing persistent and difficult- to- control postoperative pain.
Fig. 3.1 optimisation of surgical outcomes with prehabilitation.

<!-- Page 70 Table -->
|  |
| --- |
|  |

<!-- Page 71 -->
50
50 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Nutrition
(See % p. 82 for the malnourished patient.)
Patients who are at high risk of being undernourished should have formal
dietetic referral prior to surgery (Fig. 3.2).
• Consider delaying their surgery to allow time for improvement in
nutritional state.
• All patients having major surgery should have minimal fasting times and/
or complex carbohydrate loading (including non-i nsulin- dependent
diabetic patients).4
Behavioural change
Making every Contact Count (MeCC) is a behavioural change consensus
statement published by nHS Health education england in 2016. it recog-
nises that telling people what to do is not the most effective way to change
behaviour.
• Staff across health, local authority and voluntary sectors have thousands
of contacts with individuals every day.
• MeCC describes using these opportunities to raise awareness,
encourage change and signpost to supporting agencies using an ‘Ask,
Advise, Assist’ structure to promote health and healthy lifestyles.5
Alcohol
Alcohol is the most consumed recreational drug in Great britain; 57% of
adults drink alcohol regularly and nearly 10% drink on ≥5d per week.6
• established liver cirrhosis presents a significant risk for perioperative
morbidity and mortality, but even moderate consumption of alcohol is
associated with i rates of postoperative infection.
• Abstinence from alcohol for 6– 8w preoperatively has been
demonstrated to significantly reduce morbidity.7
• Using screening tools, such as the Fast Alcohol Screening test and the
Alcohol Use Disorders identification test, can identify those at risk of
alcohol dependence/ withdrawal and allow referral to specialist services
for detoxification programmes.
Smoking
(See % p. 173.)
in the UK, 14.4% of adults smoke regularly (2018).8
• Smoking is strongly associated with higher rates of significant
postoperative complications (relative risk 1.3– 2.5).9
• Smoking cessation should occur at least 4w prior to surgery to produce
a significant reduction in risk. the longer the period of abstinence, the
greater the risk reduction.
• A meta-a nalysis of preoperative smoking cessation concluded that intense
behavioural interventions significantly reduced postoperative complications
and long-t erm abstinence, compared to brief interventions.10

<!-- Page 72 -->
PreHAbilitAtion 51
Fig. 3.2 the Malnutrition Universal Screening tool (MUSt). the ‘Malnutrition
Universal Screening tool’ (‘MUSt’) is reproduced here with the kind permission of bAPen (british
Association for Parenteral and enteral nutrition). For further information on ‘MUSt’ see M www.
bapen.org.uk Copyright © bAPen 2012.

<!-- Page 73 -->
52
52 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Obesity
(See % p. 70.)
UK obesity prevalence i from 15% in 1993 to 27% in 2015. in the UK, it
is the 2nd leading risk factor for developing cancer.
• Patients with bMi >40 and obesity- related comorbidities are particularly
at risk of postoperative complications. For example, obesity doubles
the risk of joint infection after hip and knee arthroplasty.11
• Preoperative weight loss not only reduces perioperative risk,12 but may
also reduce the need for surgery.

<!-- Page 74 -->
PAtient blooD MAnAGeMent, AnAeMiA & iron DeFiCienCY 53
Patient blood management, anaemia and
iron deficiency
Patient blood management
Patient blood management (PbM) is a WHo- endorsed, multidisciplinary,
evidence- based approach to the care of patients who are at risk of re-
quiring a perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion.
• effective PbM programmes are associated with not only d blood
transfusions, but also improved surgical outcomes, with d infection
rates, perioperative Mi and CVe and d 30d mortality, as well as reduced
length of stay, readmission rates and costs.13
• PbM comprises three pillars of care:
• optimisation of haematopoiesis
• Minimisation of blood loss
• Management of postoperative anaemia.
• the detection and management of anaemia are central to the first
pillar— optimisation of haematopoiesis. this is outlined below. (For
more information on PbM, see % pp. 458–9.)
Preoperative anaemia
(See also % pp. 254–6.)
the prevalence of anaemia was found to be 36% in a large multicentre co-
hort of patients undergoing major surgery.14
• Perioperative anaemia and allogeneic blood transfusion are independent
risk factors for poor postoperative outcomes such as i length of stay,
complications and mortality.15
• new recommendations quantify anaemia as Hb <130g/d l in adult
surgical patients, irrespective of gender. Unlike the WHo definition
of anaemia, this is not gender- specific because women have smaller
circulating volumes and during surgery are just as likely to bleed as men.
they are therefore at i risk of requiring a blood transfusion.16
• the presence of anaemia should be investigated in all surgical
procedures with expected moderate to high blood loss (>500ml).16
• Anaemia investigation and treatment should start as soon as the
decision to undertake surgery is made. this gives the longest possible
time for any treatments to be efficacious.
• Major non- urgent surgery should be postponed to allow the treatment
of anaemia and iron deficiency.
Iron deficiency
• iron deficiency affects >2 billion people worldwide and remains the
leading cause of anaemia.17
• iron is an essential human bioelement with roles in erythropoiesis,
cellular respiration, o flux, gene regulation and immunity.
2
• Symptoms of iron deficiency are non- specific and independent of
anaemia. they include pallor, fatigue, exhaustion, palpitations, shortness
of breath, ‘brain fog’, hair loss and muscle pain.
• iron deficiency anaemia occurs in cases of severe iron deficiency.

<!-- Page 75 -->
54
54 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Iron physiology
• About 65% of iron is stored in Hb within red blood cells (rbCs) ±
15– 20% is stored in macrophages, myoglobin, tissue enzymes and
cytochromes, and ± 15– 20% within the liver, spleen and marrow as
haemosiderin and ferritin.
• Circulating (ferric) iron is primarily transported on transferrin, with
typically ± 30% of the binding sites being saturated.
• Systemic iron homeostasis is primarily regulated by the hepatically
produced peptide hormone hepcidin, which inhibits the movement of
iron into the circulation. in addition to high systemic iron levels, hepcidin
levels increase in response to infection, inflammation and malignancy.
• iron used for the synthesis of new rbCs is mainly from macrophage-
recycled senescent rbCs.
• normally, daily iron losses are balanced by gastrointestinal (Gi)
absorption.
Aetiology
the causes can be broadly classified into causes of absolute and functional
iron deficiency:
• Absolute iron deficiency is caused by i iron requirements, limited
supply (insufficient intake or d absorption) and chronic blood loss.
• Functional iron deficiency is caused by i hepcidin concentrations, which
may be either genetic or caused by a chronic inflammatory state.
Investigating iron deficiency
• the hallmark blood test for iron deficiency is serum ferritin (sF).
normal sF levels are >100 micrograms/ l, with sF of <15 micrograms/ l
considered pathognomonic of iron deficiency.
• transferrin saturation (t ) values of >20% are required for normal
sat
erythropoiesis.
• the main problem with sF is that it is an acute phase reactant, so iron
deficiency can exist with normal sF levels.
• in the presence of inflammation and/o r t <20%, an sF level <100
sat
micrograms/ l is indicative of iron deficiency.16
• GPs should be informed of any new diagnosis of iron deficiency
anaemia made by the preassessment service, so that the cause can be
fully investigated.
• Fig. 3.3 shows an example algorithm for the diagnosis of iron deficiency
anaemia.
Treatment of iron deficiency anaemia
• the aim of preoperative iron treatment is replenishing iron stores
(sF >100 micrograms/ l) and achieving Hb ≥130g/ dl, irrespective of
gender.
• Despite the focus on patients with a high transfusion risk, it is
considered good practice to treat all surgical patients with iron
deficiency anaemia.
• Patients with iron deficiency (without anaemia) undergoing high-
transfusion risk surgery should also be considered for supplementation.
• treatment options are either oral (Po) or intravenous (iV) iron
preparations.

<!-- Page 76 -->
PAtient blooD MAnAGeMent, AnAeMiA AnD iron DeFiCienCY 55
Patient listed for surgery with
high transfusion risk1
Laboratory workup
Hb <130g/L
Iron investigations2
Other
Normal
anaemias
Abnormal
sF >30 and <100 sF >100
sF <30
+ Tsat <20% or CRP >5 + Tsat <20% or CRP >5
Anaemia of chronic Anaemia of chronic
IDA4
inflammation with ID inflammation
Iron supplementation Liaise with
(see text) haematologist
Fig. 3.3 Algorithm for management of patients with iron deficiency anaemia. CrP,
C- reactive protein (mg/ l); sF, serum ferritin (micrograms/ l); tsat, transferrin
saturation (%).
Notes:
1 transfusion risk >10% or estimated blood loss >500ml. includes CAbG, cardiac valve proced-
ures, colorectal resection, cystectomy, nephrectomy, 1° and revision hip or knee replacement, open
carotid artery procedures and other open aortic/i liac vascular operations.
2 international consensus suggests iron investigations include sF, tsat and CrP (or equivalent inflam-
matory marker). However, some centres use reticulocyte Hb content.
reproduced from Klein AA, et al. (2016). international consensus statement on the peri-o perative
management of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia, 72, 233– 47, with permission from John
Wiley & Sons ltd. © 2016 the Authors.

<!-- Page 77 -->
56
56 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Oral iron
• if >6w until surgery, then consider a trial of Po iron (40–6 0mg daily
or 80– 100mg alternate days) and check Hb at 4w before surgery. if an
inadequate response or intolerant (gastric upset), then switch to an iV
treatment strategy.
• effective in many but requires time and education to work.
IV iron
• if <4–6 w to surgery, give iV iron.
• Highly efficacious, with symptom relief achieved at d3 and an Hb
response at d5 (maximal at 2–3 w).18
• even giving 1d preoperatively has been shown to aid postoperative
recovery.19
• Side effects: irreversible skin discoloration with extravasation (use an
infusion pump), fishbone reaction— a self- limiting reaction with flushing,
chest tightness and myalgia, and without hypotension, wheezing, stridor
or oedema (pause infusion for 15min), hypersensitivity <1/2 5 000 (less
frequent with newer preparations).
• expert haematology and pharmacist advice should be sought when
developing local policies and considering which preparations to use.
• Whilst it is recommended practice, and considered safe and effective,
to treat patients with iron deficiency preoperatively, it is important
to acknowledge the recently published PreVentt trial. this was a
UK-based randomised controlled trial of 487 patients that concluded
that preoperative iV iron was no better than placebo in reducing the
need for blood transfusion or improving 30-day mortality in anaemic
patients undergoing major abdominal surgery.20
Postoperative iron deficiency anaemia
• All patients who had major surgery with preoperative anaemia or
moderate to severe blood loss should be screened for iron deficiency
anaemia postoperatively for a minimum of 3d.
• early high-d ose iV iron is recommended as 1st- line therapy.
• High blood loss requiring blood transfusion may also require
postoperative supplementary iV iron.
Further reading
Muñoz M, Acheson AG, bisbe e, et al. (2018). An international consensus statement on the man-
agement of postoperative anaemia after major surgical procedures. Anaesthesia, 11, 1418– 31.
doi:10.1111/ anae.14358

<!-- Page 78 -->
FAStinG 57
Fasting
Preoperative fasting is defined as the restriction of fluid or food intake prior
to general anaesthesia (GA) or sedation.
Prolonged periods of fasting are unnecessary and have been associated
with deleterious effects, including distress, confusion, dehydration, CVS in-
stability, electrolyte disturbance, PonV, hypoglycaemia, insulin resistance,
worse outcomes and morbidity.
Preoperative fasting
the aim of preoperative fasting, by reducing the volume and nature of gas-
tric content, is to mitigate the risk of peri- procedural pulmonary aspiration.
• Patients should receive fasting guidance, including information on the
underlying rationale, during the anaesthetic preassessment.21
• Fasting times should be minimised, with specific consideration given to
the management of routine medication.
• ASA guidance (table 3.1) is consistent with well- established practice.21
• the ongoing administration of clear fluids should be addressed
continuously over the course of an operating list. A 2h fast for clear
fluids can translate into significantly longer periods in reality.
• in 2018, an international consensus statement was issued, advising a
reduced fasting period for clear fluids to 1h (with a maximum volume of
3ml/ kg) for children, in the absence of contraindications, undergoing
elective procedures22 (see % pp. 915–16). there is mounting pressure
for adult guidelines to adopt this reduced time frame.
• examples of clear fluids include water, non-p articulate juice, black tea or
coffee and carbohydrate nutritional drinks, but not alcohol.
• the ASA considers carbonated beverages to be clear fluids, but this is
not universally accepted— local guidelines should be followed.
• non-h uman milk is considered solid, as when mixed with gastric juices,
it congeals. Small amounts (<20%) of milk in tea and coffee divide
opinion23— local guidelines should be followed.
• normal gastric emptying of solids is slower and more variable than that
of fluids. light meals (e.g. toast) have faster gastric emptying times than
foods with a high- fat or meat content.
• Patients should not have their surgery delayed for chewing gum, sucking
a boiled sweet or smoking a cigarette immediately before coming to
theatre.23
• A vital, if obvious, practical point is to ensure that chewing gum is
removed before anaesthesia to prevent it from being aspirated.
Table 3.1 Summary of 2017 ASA guidance for adult preoperative fasting periods
Ingested material Minimum fast (h)
Clear liquids 2
Human breast milk 4
light meal and non- human milk 6
Fried fatty food and meat 8
Source: data from Anesthesiology. 2017(Mar);126(3):376–93.

<!-- Page 79 -->
58
58 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Delayed gastric emptying
• Causes: metabolic, e.g. poorly controlled diabetes mellitus (DM), renal
failure, sepsis; d gastric motility, e.g. head injury; pyloric obstruction, e.g.
pyloric stenosis; gastro- oesophageal reflux; i intra- abdominal pressure,
e.g. pregnancy, obesity; opioids; trauma.
• err on the side of caution when estimating time for an empty stomach
in trauma patients. the time taken to return to normal gastric emptying
after trauma has not been established and varies, depending upon the
degree of trauma and the level of pain.
• Anxiety has not been shown to have any consistent effect on gastric
emptying.
Gastric ultrasound
emerging work on the use of bedside ultrasound to ascertain residual gas-
tric content is promising.24 it is used to influence modification of the induc-
tion technique in the context of urgent or emergent surgery or for those
with delayed gastric emptying.25
Intraoperative management of the unfasted patient
• Check the patient’s fasting status at the time of the procedure.
• if delayed gastric emptying, consider prolonged fasting periods,
premedication and/ or modification of the anaesthetic induction.
• When preoperative fasting has not been achieved, the benefit of
proceeding should be balanced against the risk of pulmonary aspiration.
Considerations should include the type and volume of ingested material,
as well as the urgency of surgery.21
• Consideration of gastric decompression (e.g. via wide-b ore orogastric
tube (oGt) or nGt) should be made on a case- by- case basis.
• Without a clear indication for an ongoing requirement, any oGt or
nGt placed during surgery should be removed before emergence from
anaesthesia.
Postoperative resumption of oral intake
• oral fluids should be offered post-p rocedurally when patients are fully
awake and free from nausea, unless prohibited by specific instructions
from the surgeon or anaesthetist.
• if an airway has been topicalised with a local anaesthetic (lA) (e.g.
awake tracheal intubation), a patient should remain fasted until airway
anaesthesia has worn off and airway reflexes have returned.
• return to normal diet is a central component of erAS protocols and
postoperative surgical instructions should address this.

<!-- Page 80 -->
VenoUS tHroMboeMboliSM ProPHYlAxiS 59
Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
• Venous thromboembolic disease (Vte) is a common source of
perioperative morbidity and mortality.26
• Pulmonary embolism (Pe) is a potentially avoidable cause of
postoperative death and typically results from a deep vein thrombosis
(DVt) originating from within lower limb venous plexuses.
• DVts carry their own morbidity related to post- thrombotic chronic
venous insufficiency and venous ulceration.
• Without Vte prophylaxis, historical data indicate the incidence of Vte
in surgical patients is high, with up to 50% developing a DVt and 10% a
Pe.27
Risk assessment for VTE and bleeding
• the risks of Vte and bleeding are influenced by patient, surgical and
anaesthetic factors (table 3.2).
• Contributing towards the risk of Vte is the Virchow’s triad of
pathophysiological factors: hypercoagulability, abnormal venous blood
flow and endothelial damage.
• in the UK, one of the most commonly used assessments is the
Department of Health Vte risk Assessment tool.28 this indicates that
all adult surgical patients should be assessed:
• on hospital admission and at 24h post-a dmission
• each time their clinical situation changes (e.g. intraoperatively, and
both immediately and later postoperatively).
• Surgical patients with ≥1 Vte risk factor should be considered for
prophylaxis.
• intermediate- or high- risk patients ideally should have a combination of
mechanical and pharmacological prophylaxis.29
• risk scoring tools are available with online risk calculators and
recommended prophylactic strategies such as the Caprini Score.30
• Patients should be given an explanation of their assessment and the risk
vs benefit of any suggested prophylactic strategy.
Prophylactic management
• Prophylaxis should normally be started as soon as possible (usually
<14h after a non- elective admission)—u nless patient, surgical or
anaesthetic considerations preclude this.29
• Some hospitals have incorporated Vte prophylaxis into an amended
WHo Surgical Safety Checklist to address intra- and postoperative
management.
• the type, timing, dose and duration of postoperative Vte prophylaxis
should be agreed between the surgeon and the anaesthetist, and ideally
prescribed before the patient leaves theatre.
• Prophylactic management include:
• non-p harmacological measures— mechanical and inferior vena cava
(iVC) filters
• Pharmacological measures.

<!-- Page 81 -->
60
60 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Table 3.2 Vte and bleeding risk factors28
VTE risk Bleeding risk
Patient factors
thrombophilia Active bleeding
History of Vte (personal or family) Acquired bleeding disorders (e.g.
obesity (bMi >30kg/m 2) acute liver failure)
Malignancy (active or treatment) Anticoagulant use (e.g. warfarin
oestrogen- containing with international normalised ratio
contraceptive* (inr) >2)
Hormone replacement Acute CVe
therapy (Hrt)* thrombocytopenia (platelets <75
Pregnancy or <6w postpartum × 109g/ l)
Age >60y Hypertension >230/ 120mmHg
Phlebitic varicose veins Untreated inherited bleeding
disorders (e.g. haemophilia, von
Dehydration
Willebrand disease)
other significant medical disease
Surgical factors
Surgery causing reduced mobility neurosurgery
Hip fracture Spinal surgery
Hip or knee replacement ophthalmic surgery
Acute inflammatory/ intra- Procedures with high bleeding risk
abdominal condition
Anaesthetic factors
total anaesthetic time >90min neuraxial technique planned in
total anaesthetic time >60min for next 12h
pelvic or lower limb surgery neuraxial technique performed
Critical care admission within previous 4h
More than one Vte risk should prompt thromboprophylaxis. the risk of bleeding should
be balanced against the risk of Vte when deciding whether to offer pharmacological
thromboprophylaxis to surgical and trauma patients.4
* For oestrogen- containing contraceptive and Hrt, see % p. 64.
Source: data from risk assessment for venous thromboembolism (Vte), Department of Health,
M https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130123195034/http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/
Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_088215
Non- pharmacological VTE prophylaxis
Graduated compression stockings
• Should provide graduated compression of 14– 15mmHg at the calf.
• Contraindicated in peripheral artery disease, peripheral artery bypass
grafts, peripheral neuropathy, severe leg oedema, significant limb
deformity, local vulnerable skin conditions and acute CVe.29
• Skin integrity should be monitored and if compromised, the stockings
should be removed and consideration given to the use of intermittent
pneumatic compression devices.29
Intermittent pneumatic compression devices
• intermittent pneumatic compression devices compress the leg (35–
40mmHg) for ± 10s every minute, promoting venous flow.

<!-- Page 82 -->
VenoUS tHroMboeMboliSM ProPHYlAxiS 61
• there is some evidence that they are as effective as heparin in reducing
the incidence of DVt and are typically used in preference to graduated
compression stockings for higher- risk patients.31
• they are used for patients with known i risk for DVt and in major
surgery and/ or prolonged surgery.
IVC filters
• the evidence for the use of iVC filters in patients with
a contraindication for pharmacological and mechanical
thromboprophylaxis is not robust.31
• iVC filter- associated complications often outweigh a potential benefit.
they are therefore not routinely used in the perioperative period.
However, they could be considered for insertion in high-r isk patients
(e.g. recent proven DVt with non- deferrable major surgery) when
other methods are contraindicated, but only on a case-b y- case basis
and in discussion with the patient and the multidisciplinary team.
Pharmacological prophylaxis
• low-m olecular weight heparin (lMWH) is a commonly used agent
(adjusted for both weight and renal function), e.g. for a 50–1 00kg
patient, enoxaparin 40mg/ 24h subcutaneously (SC) or 20mg if
creatinine clearance (CC) <30ml/ min.
• other agents can be used but are usually surgery- (or patient- ) specific
and reflect current evidence. these include unfractionated heparin
(UFH), rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, fondaparinux, warfarin and
aspirin.6 local, national or international guidelines should be followed.
• Anaesthetic assessment should address the timing and management
of any pre- and postoperative dosing, specifically with regard to any
anaesthetic procedures (e.g. neuraxial or regional techniques).
• if pharmacological prophylaxis is contraindicated, then mechanical
prophylaxis in isolation should be commenced (preferably with
intermittent pneumatic compression devices).31
Paediatrics
(See % Chapter 36 for general paediatric anaesthesia information.)
the majority of paediatric surgical patients do not require Vte prophy-
laxis. However, the Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great britain
and ireland (APAGbi) Guidelines32 recommends that children aged ≥13y
should be risk- assessed for Vte (and bleeding) and managed accordingly.
Specifically they suggest:
• Children ≥13y and >40kg, with an expected anaesthetic time >60min,
should be fitted with intermittent pneumatic compression devices
intraoperatively.
• Central venous catheter (CVC) lines are the commonest risk factor for
paediatric Vte.
• other Vte risk factors are similar to those for an adult.
• Paediatric patients are classed as low (no risk factors), moderate risk
(one risk factor) or high risk (≥2 risk factors).
• Consider graduated compression stockings in moderate-r isk patients
(if >40kg and appropriate size).
• High- risk patients should be assessed for potential lMWH.

<!-- Page 83 -->
62
62 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Antibiotic prophylaxis
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is administered to patients as part of a care
bundle to mitigate the risk of surgical site (wound) infection.33
• other anaesthetic components of this bundle include maintaining
patient homeostasis such as normothermia, adequate oxygenation,
tissue perfusion and targeted glycaemic control.
Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis34
• Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended before:
• Clean surgery involving prosthesis or implants
• Clean- contaminated surgery
• Contaminated surgery.
• it is not recommended for clean, non-p rosthetic, uncomplicated
surgery.
• A patient’s antibiotic allergy and meticillin-r esistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MrSA) status should be identified during preoperative assessment, and
prophylactic antibiotic choices tailored accordingly.
• best practice is to inform patients preoperatively if they will need
antibiotic prophylaxis. they should also be informed postoperatively if
they received antibiotics during the operation.
• A course of antibiotic treatment should be given to patients having
surgery on dirty or infected wounds or to those with proven or
suspected systemic sepsis.
Timing of prophylactic antibiotics
• the WHo recommends that antibiotic prophylaxis is given within
60min of surgical incision.
• one exception is with infected patients where it is planned to take
surgical samples prior to administering antibiotics.
• it is recommended that prophylactic antibiotics are administered on
starting anaesthesia; however, earlier prophylaxis may be needed for
procedures requiring a tourniquet.34
• Antibiotics with long infusion durations should be commenced, so that
the infusion is complete before whichever is the earlier of knife to
skin or tourniquet inflation (e.g. vancomycin and fluoroquinolones are
infused over 60– 120min).
• repeat antibiotic doses should be administered for procedures >2–4 h
(typically where the duration >2 half- lives of the antibiotic) or with
associated significant blood loss (>1.5l).33,35
• it is important to note that certain patient factors, such as extensive
burns or renal failure, may impact on the half-l ife of the antibiotic.
• Decisions on the choice of antibiotics and redosing should follow local
guidelines or the advice of a microbiologist.
Decolonisation
• For procedures where S. aureus is a likely cause of surgical site infection,
consider preoperative decolonisation, e.g. with a course of nasal
mupirocin and chlorhexidine body wash.
• Screening for both MrSA and meticillin- sensitive S. aureus can help
guide decision- making for decolonisation and subsequent prophylactic
antibiotic choice.

<!-- Page 84 -->
AntibiotiC ProPHYlAxiS 63
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis36,37
• infective endocarditis (ie) is rare but has a high mortality rate.
• Guidelines have not been in agreement about antibiotic prophylaxis in
the prevention of ie.
• the european Society of Cardiology and the American Heart
Association have each restricted prophylactic antibiotics to those
patients with the highest risk of adverse outcomes.
• in contrast, niCe went even further and advised against prophylactic
antibiotics altogether. the exception to this is patients at risk of ie who
are undergoing a Gi or genitourinary procedure at a site of suspected
or proven infection should receive antibiotics that cover organisms
causative of ie.
• there is no global consensus for patients traditionally considered
high risk. box 3.1 outlines cardiac conditions considered at risk of ie
by niCe.
Box 3.1 Cardiac conditions at risk of IE36
• Previous ie
• Acquired heart valve disease with stenosis or regurgitation
• Heart valve replacement
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
• Structural congenital heart disease, excluding isolated atrial septal
defect (ASD), fully repaired ventricular septal defect (VSD) or fully
repaired persistent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and closure devices that
are thought to be endothelialised
General recommendations
• Antibiotics indicated for surgical procedures should be given as normal.
• For ‘infected surgery’ in patients at risk of ie, appropriate antibiotic
prophylaxis should be administered.
• in patients at high risk of ie, the decision to provide prophylactic
antibiotics for dental treatment should be made by treating clinicians
after discussion with the patient.
• Administration of antibiotics is not risk-f ree, and local protocols should
be followed.

<!-- Page 85 -->
64
64 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Perioperative medications
Prescribed, over- the- counter, herbal and recreational medications need
to be carefully considered at the time of the preoperative assessment.
individualised plans that take into account patient and surgical factors (and
based on local guidelines) should be made and clearly communicated (in
written form) to the patient and teams involved in their perioperative care.
Some specific considerations include:
• Anticoagulants and antiplatelet therapies (see % pp. 269–79)
• Diabetic medications (see % pp. 216–21)
• Antipsychotics (see % p. 334)
• renin– angiotensin system antagonists (see % Chapter 5, in particular
% p. 107, p. 113 and p. 116)
• β- blockers (see % Chapter 5, in particular % p. 107, p. 113 and p. 116)
• Antiepileptics (see % pp. 300–2) and anti- Parkinson’s medications
(see % pp. 292–5).
Statins
• Statins should be continued due to their effects on improved endothelial
function, enhanced stability of atherosclerotic plaques and reduced
vascular inflammation, causing a decrease in perioperative cardiac
events.38
Oestrogen therapy
• niCe guidance39 recommends that women consider stopping oestrogen
therapy (contraception or Hrt) 4w before elective surgery due to the
theoretical i risk of Vte.
• there is, however, no consensus on the perioperative advice to give
patients due to insufficient evidence for i perioperative Vte risk and
the risks of unwanted pregnancy, or the recurrence of troublesome
menopausal symptoms. these should be considered in a patient’s
decision- making process.
• Patients should be advised on a case- by- case basis. if contraception is
stopped, advice must be given about alternative contraceptive measures
and discussions documented.

<!-- Page 86 -->
HerbAl MeDiCineS AnD AnAeStHeSiA 65
Herbal medicines and anaesthesia
• About 5–1 4% of patients take perioperative herbal medication.
• of these, 70% do not disclose this fact to their doctor.
• Content of herbal remedies may vary dramatically.
• Most herbal remedies are harmless, but some may have important
consequences for anaesthesia (table 3.3).
• the ASA recommends that patients stop herbal medications 2w before
surgery.
Table 3.3 Herbal medicines which may affect anaesthesia
Drug (common name) Potential uses Perioperative concerns
echinacea (purple boosts immune immunosuppression in
coneflower root) system (stimulates cell- long- term use. Avoid in
mediated immunity) transplant surgery. May cause
hepatoxicity40
ephedra (Ma huang) Promotes weight i risk of cardiac arrhythmias,
loss. Used for asthma hypertension, CVe and
and bronchitis Mi.41 May cause ventricular
(direct and indirect arrhythmias with halothane.
sympathomimetic) life- threatening interaction
with MAois40
Garlic treatment of i risk of bleeding due to
hypertension, antiplatelet effects42
hyperlipidaemia and
atherosclerosis
Ginkgo (duck foot tree, Used to improve i risk of bleeding when
maidenhair tree, silver mental alertness combined with anticoagulant
apricot) (antiplatelet activity) and antithrombotic
medication43
Ginseng (American, Aimed at increasing May lower blood
Asian, Chinese, Korean physical and mental concentration of warfarin.
ginseng) stamina May cause hypoglycaemia.40
May see tachycardia and
hypertension
Kava- kava (intoxicating Anxiolytic and muscle Can increase sedative effect of
pepper, kawa) relaxant anaesthetic 40
St John’s wort Antidepression, induction of cytochrome P450
(amber, goat weed, anxiolytic and liver enzymes. Decreases
hardhay, Hypericum, used in sleep serum digoxin levels.40 Avoid in
klamatheweed) disorders (inhibits transplant surgery.44Associated
neurotransmitter with hypertensive crisis45
reuptake)
Valerian (All heal, Sleeping aid Potentiates anaesthetic agents40
garden heliotrope,
vandal root)
Further reading
Skinner CM, rangasami J (2002). Preoperative use of herbal medicines: a patient survey. Br J Anaesth,
89, 792– 5.

<!-- Page 86 Table -->
| Table 3.3 Herbal medicines which may affect anaesthesia |
| --- |
| Drug (common name) Potential uses Perioperative concerns |
| echinacea (purple boosts immune immunosuppression in coneflower root) system (stimulates cell- long- term use. Avoid in mediated immunity) transplant surgery. May cause hepatoxicity40 ephedra (Ma huang) Promotes weight i risk of cardiac arrhythmias, loss. Used for asthma hypertension, CVe and and bronchitis Mi.41 May cause ventricular (direct and indirect arrhythmias with halothane. sympathomimetic) life- threatening interaction with MAois40 Garlic treatment of i risk of bleeding due to hypertension, antiplatelet effects42 hyperlipidaemia and atherosclerosis Ginkgo (duck foot tree, Used to improve i risk of bleeding when maidenhair tree, silver mental alertness combined with anticoagulant apricot) (antiplatelet activity) and antithrombotic medication43 Ginseng (American, Aimed at increasing May lower blood Asian, Chinese, Korean physical and mental concentration of warfarin. ginseng) stamina May cause hypoglycaemia.40 May see tachycardia and hypertension Kava- kava (intoxicating Anxiolytic and muscle Can increase sedative effect of pepper, kawa) relaxant anaesthetic 40 St John’s wort Antidepression, induction of cytochrome P450 (amber, goat weed, anxiolytic and liver enzymes. Decreases hardhay, Hypericum, used in sleep serum digoxin levels.40 Avoid in klamatheweed) disorders (inhibits transplant surgery.44Associated neurotransmitter with hypertensive crisis45 reuptake) Valerian (All heal, Sleeping aid Potentiates anaesthetic agents40 garden heliotrope, vandal root) |
|  |

<!-- Page 87 -->
66
66 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
Premedicants
• Premedicants are given before the induction of anaesthesia.
• the aims of premedication are to improve patient comfort and reduce
perioperative risk.
• Changes in anaesthetics agents and short postoperative stays have led
to the decline in premedicant prescription.
• Commonly used premedicants are outlined below. (See % p. 917 for
paediatric premedicants.)
Analgesics
• Paracetamol. Can be considered in all patients unless contraindicated.
Single dosing >1g for higher body weight patients is safe if max 4g/d ay.
Po dose 1– 2g.
• nSAiDs. Commonly prescribed (avoid in patients with a history of
gastric ulceration and renal impairment, and caution in older patients).
Suggested Po doses: ibuprofen 400mg, diclofenac 50– 100mg.
• topical lAs (e.g. prilocaine, eMlA®), often used in paediatrics (see
% p. 916).
Anxiolytics
(See % p. 419 for sedation.)
• benzodiazepines. Most commonly used anxiolytics. longer-a cting agents
may delay recovery. effects range from mild anxiolysis to deep sedation,
depending on dose. temazepam Po 10– 20mg, lorazepam Po 1– 2mg.
• opioids. Strong analgesic agents that produce sedation more than
anxiolysis. less commonly used as premedicants. Po/ intramuscular
(iM) dose of morphine10– 20mg.
• Ketamine. Produces rapid sedation and analgesia. Particularly
useful in reduced/ non- compliant patients. Co- administration with
benzodiazepines may reduce hallucinations. Suggested doses: Po 5–
7mg/ kg, iM 2– 5mg/ kg, iV 0.5– 1mg/ kg.
Antacids and prophylaxis of aspiration pneumonitis
• Sodium citrate (Po 30ml of 0.3M solution). often given prior to GA
for Caesarean section (CS), increases pH but does not decrease volume
of gastric contents.
• Proton pump inhibitors decrease volume and increase pH of gastric
contents. Also used to decrease gastric irritant effects of nSAiDs.
omeprazole Po 20– 40mg.
• Histamine (H2) receptor antagonists decrease gastric acid secretion.
ranitidine can be given iV or Po (iV 50mg, diluted in 20ml of 0.9%
sodium chloride, given over 2min; Po 150mg).
• Metoclopramide increases gastric emptying and decreases gastric
volume, and also has antiemetic effects. Given as 10mg Po/ iV.
Antisialagogues
• Anticholinergic. Glycopyrronium bromide often used prior to awake
tracheal intubation. Dose: iV 200– 400 micrograms.

<!-- Page 88 -->
PreMeDiCAntS 67
References
1 Ditmyer MM, topp r, Pifer M (2002). Prehabilitation in preparation for orthopaedic surgery.
Orthop Nurs, 21, 43– 51.
2 Moholdt t, Moe b, nilsen til (2019). Patterns of physical activity over 22 years and mor-
tality: the HUnt Study, norway. Eur Heart J, 40, 627. M https:// doi.org/ 10.1093/ eurheartj/
ehz747.0235
3 Santa Mina D, Clarke H, ritvo P, et al. (2014). effect of total body prehabilitation on postoperative
outcomes: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Physiotherapy, 100, 196– 207.
4 british Association for Parenteral and enteral nutrition (bAPen) (2012). Perioperative nutrition—
decision tree. M https:// www.bapen.org.uk/ pdfs/ decision- trees/ perioperative- nutrition.pdf
5 nHS Health education england. Making Every Contact Count. M https:// www.
makingeverycontactcount.co.uk/
6 office for national Statistics (2017). Statistical bulletin: adult drinking habits in Great Britain:
2017. M https:// www.ons.gov.uk/ peoplepopulationandcommunity/ healthandsocialcare/
drugusealcoholandsmoking/ bulletins/ opinionsandlifestylesurveyadultdrinkinghabitsingreatbrit
ain/ 2017
7 tonnesen H, Kehlet H (1999). Preoperative alcoholism and postoperative morbidity. Br J Surg,
86, 869– 74. M https:// doi.org/ 10.1046/ j.1365- 2168.1999.01181.x
8 national Statistics (2019). Statistics on Smoking, England 2019. M https:// www.gov.uk/ govern-
ment/ statistics/ statistics- on- smoking- england- 2019
9 Grønkjær M, eliasen M, Skov- ettrup lS, et al. (2014). Preoperative smoking status and
postoperative complications: a systematic review and meta-a nalysis. Ann Surg, 259, 52– 71. M
https:// doi.org/ 10.1097/ SlA.0b013e3182911913
10 thomsen t, Villebro n, Møller AM (2010). interventions for preoperative smoking cessation
(review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 7, CD002294. doi:10.1002/1 4651858.CD002294.pub3.
M http:// www.ncsct.co.uk/ usr/ pub/ interventions- for- preoperative.pdf
11 Kerkhoffs GMMJ, Servien e, Dunn W, et al. (2012). the influence of obesity on the complication
rate and outcome of total knee arthroplasty: a meta-a nalysis and systematic literature review. J
Bone Joint Surg Am, 5, 1839– 44. doi:10.2106/ JbJS.K.00820.
12 Anderin C, Gustafsson Uo, Heijbel n, et al. (2015). Weight loss before bariatric surgery and
postoperative complications: data from the Scandinavian obesity registry (Soreg). Ann Surg,
261, 909– 13. doi:10.1097/ SlA.0000000000000839
13 leahy MF, Hofmann A, towler S, et al. (2017). improved outcomes and reduced costs associated
with a health-s ystem- wide patient blood management program: a retrospective observational
study in four major adult tertiary- care hospitals. Transfusion, 57, 1347– 58.
14 Muñoz M, laso- Morales MJ, Gómez- ramírez, S, et al. (2017). Pre- operative haemoglobin levels
and iron status in a large multicentre cohort of patients undergoing major elective surgery.
Anaesthesia, 72, 826– 34. doi:10.1111/ anae.13840
15 Musallam KM, tamim HM, richards t, et al. (2011). Preoperative anaemia and postoperative
outcomes in non- cardiac surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet, 378, 1396– 407.
16 Muñoz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, et al. (2017). international consensus statement on the
peri- operative management of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia, 72, 233– 47.
17 Vos t, Allen C, Arora M, et al. (2015). Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence,
and years lived with disability for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990–2 015: a systematic ana-
lysis for the Global burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet, 388, 1545– 602. doi:10.1016/
S0140- 6736(16)31678- 6
18 Goodnough lt, Skikne b, brugnara C (2000). erythropoietin, iron, and erythropoiesis. Blood, 96,
823– 33.
19 Johansson Pi, rasmussen AS, thomsen ll (2015). intravenous iron isomaltoside 1000
(Monofer®) reduces postoperative anaemia in preoperatively non-a naemic patients undergoing
elective or subacute coronary artery bypass graft, valve replacement or a combination thereof:
a randomized double-b lind placebo-c ontrolled clinical trial (the ProteCt trial). Vox Sang, 109,
257– 66.
20 richards t, baikady rr, Clevenger b, et al. (2020). Preoperative intravenous iron to treat an-
aemia before major abdominal surgery (PreVentt): a randomised, double-blind controlled
trial. Lancet, 6376, 1–9. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31539-7
21 American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) (2017). Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting
and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to
healthy patients undergoing elective procedures. M https:// anesthesiology.pubs.asahq.org/ article.
aspx?articleid=2596245
22 thomas M, Morrison C, newton r, et al. (2018). Consensus statement on clear fluids fasting for
elective paediatric anaesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth, 28, 411– 14.

<!-- Page 89 -->
68
68 CHAPter 3 Preoptimisation
23 Smith i, Kranke P, Murat i, et al. (2011). Perioperative fasting in adults and children guidelines from
the european Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol, 28, 556– 69.
24 Song i- K, Kim H-J , lee J-H , et al. (2016). Ultrasound assessment of gastric volume in children
after drinking carbohydrate- containing fluids. Br J Anaesth, 116, 513– 17.
25 Gagey A- C, de Queiroz Siqueira M, Monard C, et al. (2018). the effect of pre- operative gas-
tric ultrasound examination on the choice of general anaesthetic induction technique for non-
elective paediatric surgery. A prospective cohort study. Anaesthesia, 73, 304– 12.
26 Anderson Dr, Morgano GP, bennett C, et al. (2019). American Society of Hematology 2019
guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: prevention of venous thrombo-
embolism in surgical hospitalized patients. Blood Adv, 3, 3898– 944. M https:// doi.org/ 10.1182/
bloodadvances.2019000975
27 nicolaides An, Fareed J, Kakkar AK, et al. (2006). Prevention and treatment of venous thrombo-
embolism. international Consensus Statement (guidelines according to scientific evidence). Int
Angiol, 25, 101– 61. M https:// venousdisease.com/ site/ wp- content/ uploads/ 2013/ 08/
venous- thromboembolism- international- consensus- guidelines.pdf
28 Department of Health (2010). Venous thromboembolism (VTE) risk assessment. M https://
webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ 20130123195034/ http:// www.dh.gov.uk/ en/
Publicationsandstatistics/ Publications/ PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/ DH_ 088215
29 national institute for Health and Care excellence (2018). Venous thromboembolism in over 16s:
reducing the risk of hospital acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism. M https:// www.
nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng89/
30 Venous resource Center. Are you at risk for DVT? M https:// venousdisease.com/ caprini- dvt- risk-
assessment/
31 Afshari A, Ageno W, Ahmed A, et al. (2018). european guidelines on periopera-
tive venous thromboembolism prophylaxis. Eur J Anaesthesiol, 35, 77– 83. doi:10.1097/
eJA.0000000000000729. M https:// journals.lww.com/ ejanaesthesiology/ fulltext/ 2018/
02000/ european guidelines on perioperative_ venous.2.aspx
32 Morgan J, Checketts M, Arana A, et al. (2018). Prevention of perioperative venous
thromboemolism in paediatric patients: guidelines from the Association of Anaesthetists of
Great britain and ireland (APAGbi). Paediatr Anaesth, 28, 382– 91. M https:// www.apagbi.org.
uk/ sites/d efault/ files/ inline- files/ APA%20thromboprophylaxis%20guidelines%20final.pdf
33 Global Alliance for infections in Surgery (2019). Principles of antibiotic prophylaxis in surgery. M
https:// infectionsinsurgery.files.wordpress.com/ 2019/ 02/ prophylaxis- principles- 1- 1.pdf
34 national institute for Health and Care excellence (2019). Surgical site infections: prevention and
treatment. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng125/ chapter/ recommendations
35 Health improvement Scotland and Scottish Antimicrobial Prescribing Group (SAPG) (2018).
Recommendations for re- dosing antibiotics for surgical prophylaxis. M https:// www.sapg.scot/
media/ 3880/ good- practice- recommendations- for- re- dosing- surgical- prophylaxis- final.pdf
36 national institute for Health and Care excellence (2008). Prophylaxis against infective endocar-
ditis. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ CG64/ chapter/ recommendations#adults- and-
children- with- structural- cardiac- defects- at- risk- of- developing- infective- endocarditis
37 tulunay Kaya C, erol C (2018). How to achieve infective endocarditis prophylaxis. e-J ournal of
Cardiology Practice, 16, no. 33. M https:// www.escardio.org/ Journals/ e- Journal- of- Cardiology-
Practice/ Volume- 16/ vol16no33
38 Schouten o, boersma e, Hoeks Se, et al.; Dutch echocardiographic Cardiac risk evaluation
Applying Stress echocardiography Study Group (2009). Fluvastatin and perioperative events in
patients undergoing vascular surgery. N Engl J Med, 361, 980– 9.
39 national institute for Health and Care excellence (2018, updated August 2019). Venous thrombo-
embolism in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital acquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary em-
bolism. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng89/
40 Ang- lee MK, Moss J, Yuan CS (2001). Herbal medicines and perioperative care. JAMA, 286,
208– 16.
41 Haller CA, benowitz nl (2000). Adverse cardiovascular and central nervous system events as-
sociated with dietary supplements containing ephedra alkaloids. N Engl J Med, 343, 1833– 8.
42 Wong A, townley S (2011). Herbal medicines and anaesthesia. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain,
11, 14– 17.
43 bebbington A, Kulkarni r, roberts P (2005). Ginkgo biloba: persistent bleeding after total hip
arthroplasty caused by herbal self- medication. J Arthroplasty, 20, 125– 6.
44 ernst e (2002). St John’s wort supplements endanger the success of organ transplantation. Arch
Surg, 137, 316– 19.
45 Patel S, robinson r, burk M (2002). Hypertensive crisis associated with St John’s wort. Am J Med,
112, 507– 8.

<!-- Page 90 -->
Chapter 4 69
At- risk populations
Nicholas Kennedy and Katherine Reeve
Obesity introduction 70
Common comorbidities in obesity 71
Obstructive sleep apnoea 73
Airway considerations in obesity 76
Practicalities with obese patients 77
Pharmacology in obese patients 80
Thromboprophylaxis in obesity 81
Elizabeth Fontaine
The malnourished patient 82
Cachexia related to chronic illness or malignancy 83
Anorexia nervosa 86
Short gut (bowel) syndrome 88
Stuart White
Considerations for the older patient 89
Anaesthesia for older patients 92
When not to operate on older people 94
Rebecca Mawer and Alexander Lomas
Learning disabilities and/ or autism 95
Autistic spectrum disorder 96

<!-- Page 91 -->
70
70 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Obesity introduction
The prevalence of obesity is increasing worldwide and so the number of
obese surgical patients increases. recent UK government statistics, pub-
lished in 2019, suggest that the majority of adults are either overweight
or obese (64%).1 Obesity prevalence i steeply between 1993 and around
2000, with a slower rate of increase after that. In 2017, the proportion of
adults who were obese in the UK was 29%. Obesity is more common in
women (30%) than in men (27%). Morbid obesity has also i, with <1% in
1993, to nearly 4% in 2017.1 The rise in obesity applies not only to adults,
but also to children. Globally, the obesity rate in the United States (US) is
the highest at 40%; however, countries such as Japan and Korea have rates
lower than 10%.2
Anaesthesia and surgery may entail considerable risk for obese patients.
Obesity is a multisystem disorder, particularly involving the respiratory
system and CVS; therefore, a multidisciplinary approach is required.
Definitions
Obesity is defined by the BMI. BMI is defined as weight (in kg) divided by the
height (in m squared) (Table 4.1).
Table 4.1 BMI definitions
BMI (in kg/ m2) Obesity class
<19.9 Underweight
20– 24.9 Normal
25– 29.9 Overweight
30– 39.9 Obese
40– 49.9 Morbidly obese
50– 59.9 Super obese
60– 69.9 Super super obese
>70 hyperobese

<!-- Page 92 -->
COMMON COMOrBIdITIeS IN OBeSITy 71
Common comorbidities in obesity
Respiratory system
• OSA (see % pp. 73–5; % p. 186).
• Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OhS):
• OhS is at the severe end- stage of OSA in obese patients,
characterised by diurnal variation in ventilation and arterial partial
pressure of CO (PaCO) >5.9 kPa. Sensitivity to CO is reduced due
2 2 2
to loss of central drive, leading to hypoventilation.
• O consumption is i by metabolically active adipose tissue and the
2
workload of supporting muscles, with associated increase in CO
2
production.
• Functional residual capacity (FrC) is reduced in the awake obese patient
and decreases significantly following induction, which may encroach
upon the closing capacity. Pulmonary compliance is d due to a heavy
chest wall and a splinted diaphragm. O desaturation occurs rapidly in
2
the obese, apnoeic patient.
• Obese patients may have clinical signs that appear to be asthma. In
many cases, the bronchoconstrictive symptoms experienced by the
obese are often due to airway closure without affecting the calibre
of the airways.3 This increase in airway closure is a direct effect of
obesity and is not due to any intrinsic lung disease. It is not improved by
bronchodilator therapy.
Cardiovascular system
• The excess adipose tissue exerts increasing metabolic demands on the
CVS, leading to i cardiac output (CO), myocardial demand and arterial
pressure, and i blood volume.
• hypertension is more prevalent in obesity. This results in LV dilation and
hypertrophy, ultimately leading to elevated LV end-d iastolic pressure
(LVedP).
• Blood volume is i and this, coupled with i LVedP, increases the risk of
developing heart failure.
• right ventricular (rV) failure (see % Chapter 5) is common in morbidly
obese patients. It can be due to LV changes, OSA and/ or OhS, which
leads to pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension. It
is difficult to diagnose, requires investigation and increases the risk of
surgery.
• Obese patients are at i risk of arrhythmias.
• In addition to all these factors, the i incidence of dM and reduced level
of activity increase the risk of developing Ihd in the obese population.
Endocrine system
Insulin resistance and diabetes
• Insulin resistance with hyperinsulinaemia is characteristic of obesity and
is present before the onset of hyperglycaemia.
• hyperinsulinaemia is caused by both insulin resistance and an
impairment in glucose removal.
• Peripheral resistance to the effects of insulin on glucose and fatty acid
utilisation leads to type 2 diabetes.
• Many obese patients will be on complex antidiabetic drug regimens.
Normal protocols may not work in the obese, and their insulin
requirements appear to be greater than those of the non-o bese.

<!-- Page 93 -->
72
72 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
• Bariatric surgery, particularly gastric bypass, often has a profound effect
on type 2 diabetes control immediately postoperatively, before any
weight loss occurs. Complete resolution of type 2 diabetes occurs
within a year in up to 80% of patients following gastric bypass.
Metabolic syndrome
• This is defined as the occurrence of several metabolic risk factors
for both type 2 diabetes and CVS disease (abdominal obesity,
hyperglycaemia, dyslipidaemia and hypertension). The National
Cholesterol education Program/ Adult Treatment Panel III (NCeP/A TP
III) is the most widely used, and its criteria include the presence of any
three of the following five traits:
• Abdominal obesity, defined as a waist circumference in men ≥102cm
and in women ≥88cm
• Serum triglycerides ≥1.7mmol/ L or drug treatment for elevated
triglycerides
• Serum high- density lipoprotein (hdL) cholesterol <1mmol/ L in
men and <1.3mmol/ L in women, or drug treatment for low hdL
cholesterol
• BP ≥130/ 85mmhg or drug treatment for elevated BP
• Fasting plasma glucose ≥5.6mmol/ L, or drug treatment for elevated
blood glucose.
• hyperinsulinaemia and hyperglycaemia associated with obesity, along
with adipokines, may lead to vascular endothelial dysfunction, an
abnormal lipid profile, hypertension and vascular inflammation, all of
which promote the development of atherosclerotic disease.4
• The prevalence of obese patients admitted to critical care is increasing.
Outcome data show predominantly either equal or lower mortality
in obese patients than in normal- weight, critically ill patients.5 This
phenomenon— the obesity paradox6— has been observed in obese
patients with heart failure and sepsis too. There is also no evidence that
surgical outcomes in obese patients are worse than in normal-w eight
patients.
Gastrointestinal
These patients are more likely to have raised intra-a bdominal pressures and
are at greater risk of developing a hiatus hernia, contributing to an i risk of
reflux and aspiration.
Venous thromboembolic disease
(See also % p. 59.)
There is a significantly i risk for dVT and Pe in obese subjects. In add-
ition, there is an i risk of recurrent VTe once anticoagulation treatment has
been withdrawn.7
• Obesity also appears to contribute to further increasing the risk of VTe
in a number of other settings:
• Smoking and age in patients with Factor V Leiden mutation
• Long-d uration air travel
• Women taking oral contraceptives.

<!-- Page 94 -->
OBSTrUCTIVe SLeeP APNOeA 73
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Sleep apnoea8 is defined as the cessation of airflow at the mouth and nose
for at least 10s during sleep. Sufferers develop intermittent respiratory ar-
rest and hypoxaemia during rapid eye movement (reM) sleep. respiration
resumes due to hypoxic stimulation.
Apnoeas may be obstructive, central or mixed. OSA, the most prevalent
(85%), occurs commonly in patients with obesity and results from obstruc-
tion of the upper airway. Central apnoea (5%) is due to intermittent loss
of respiratory drive.
General considerations
• OSA patients have an i perioperative risk. This is likely due to i upper
airway collapse and OSA- related comorbidities.
• OSA is an independent risk factor for serious neurocognitive, endocrine
and CVS morbidity and mortality in all age groups.
• In children, OSA is most commonly associated with adenotonsillar
hypertrophy, but the severity of OSA is not always proportional to the
size of the tonsils and adenoids.
• Patients with OSA are at risk of perioperative airway obstruction and
respiratory failure while under the effects of sedatives and opioid
analgesics.
Diagnosis and treatment
• OSA is often diagnosed on history and examination. Overweight,
middle- aged men who present with snoring and periods of apnoea will
almost certainly have OSA. however, for standardisation and qualitative
diagnosis, more formal investigations are required.
• The gold standard for diagnosis is polysomnography (PSG). PSG is a
scarce, lab- based, labour-i ntensive and expensive study.
• during PSG, recordings of eCG, electroencephalogram (eeG), eye
movements and electromyogram (eMG) are taken. respiratory effort,
oronasal airflow, peripheral SpO and body position are commonly
2
also recorded. After a night’s sleep, the recordings are analysed in 30s
intervals called epochs. The stages of sleep are recorded with help of
the eeG. The apnoea– hypopnoea index (AhI) and oxygen desaturation
index (OdI) are calculated, along with the arousal index and level of
sleep disturbance.
• The AhI is the number of apnoeas per hour of sleep. The severity of
OSA can be classified according to the AhI:
• AhI <5— normal
• AhI ≥5, but <15/ h— mild
• AhI ≥15, but <30/ h— moderate
• AhI ≥30/ h— severe.
• The OdI is the number of times per hour of sleep that the blood O
2
level drops ≥4% from the baseline. The severity of OSA has been
related to the OdI with the same criteria as with the AhI above, with
severe OSA relating to an OdI ≥30/h .
• The numerous monitors can make performing PSG in children
difficult. Compared to adults, due to developmental and physiological
differences, children require age- adjusted scoring and interpretation. For
example, obstructive apnoeas and hypopnoeas are scored if they are at
least two breaths’ duration, even if they are <10s duration.

<!-- Page 95 -->
74
74 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
• home sleep apnoea testing is accessible and cost-e ffective, and includes
overnight SpO (giving the OdI) or SpO and airflow and abdominal
2 2
movement monitoring (giving the OdI/ AhI).
• Several tools are available to assess OSA. Commonly used are the
epworth Sleepiness Scale and the STOP- Bang assessment (Box 4.1).
• Patients with significant sleep apnoea should be treated with continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) overnight using a nasal or face mask.
Box 4.1 STOP- Bang assessment
Score (<5, low risk of OSA; ≥5, high risk of OSA):
• Snoring loudly • BMI >35kg/ m2
• Tired: daytime somnolence • Age >50
• Observed apnoeic episodes • Neck circumference >15.75in
• Pressure: hypertension • Gender: ♂
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer health, Inc.:Chung F, et al. STOP Questionnaire:
A Tool to Screen Patients for Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Anesthesiology 2008:108(5);812–
21, ©2008. M https:// pubs.asahq.org/ anesthesiology/ article/ 108/ 5/ 812/ 8377/
STOP- QuestionnaireA- Tool- to- Screen- Patients- for
Perioperative consideration
Preoperative assessment
• OSA is undiagnosed in 80% of patients. Preoperative evaluation should
include a review of previous medical records, a history from the patient
and/ or family and a physical examination. In a recent Canadian study, in
267 preassessed patients with moderate to severe OSA, 92% and 60%
were not diagnosed by their surgeons and anaesthetists, respectively.9
• Check for airway difficulty with previous anaesthetics, hypertension and
other CVS problems. Use a screening tool such as STOP- Bang.
• OhS is the extreme end of OSA. These patients are morbidly obese,
have significant daytime somnolence and breathlessness and are
particularly sensitive to anaesthesia and opioids. It is important to
identify them preoperatively.
• Note any current treatment and compliance such as with CPAP.
• day surgery may be reasonable, depending on OSA severity,
comorbidities, analgesic requirements and nature of the proposed
surgery.
• In patients with a new diagnosis of OSA treated with CPAP, it is
advisable to delay surgery for 1– 3mo. however, consideration for the
urgency of surgery and patient preference should be given.
Investigations
• In known OSA, perform FBC (polycythaemia), SpO and eCG (right
2
heart strain). If the eCG shows right heart strain, echocardiography is
indicated to exclude rV hypertrophy.
• If hypoxic on air, consider performing an arterial blood gas (ABG).

<!-- Page 96 -->
OBSTrUCTIVe SLeeP APNOeA 75
Conduct of anaesthesia
• Avoid night sedation and sedative premedication.
• Anticipate that mask ventilation and intubation may be difficult, and
prepare for this.
• A local or regional anaesthetic technique is preferred where suitable.
Use short- acting anaesthetic/ analgesic agents where possible.
• GA preceded by preoxygenation, with tracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation, is preferred to sedation or GA with spontaneous
ventilation (SV).
• Give NSAIds and paracetamol.
• At the end of the procedure, ensure NMB is fully reversed and
extubate fully awake in the sitting position.
Postoperative care
• Nurse the patient sitting up whenever possible.
• high-r isk patients may require admission to hdU/ intensive care
unit (ICU).
• Administer supplementary O, and ensure continuous SpO monitoring
2 2
on the ward.
• Unless contraindicated, CPAP should be administered continuously to
patients who were using it preoperatively.
• Aim to maintain the O saturation that the patient had preoperatively,
2
titrating O to the minimum required.
2
• Minimise opioid analgesics. If used, consider postoperative location,
level of staff training and need for i monitoring.

<!-- Page 97 -->
76
76 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Airway considerations in obesity
The rcoA’s National Audit Project 4 (NAP4) report in 2011 indicates
airway difficulties in the obese patient are twice those in the general popu-
lation, and even higher in the morbidly obese. Problems included an i fre-
quency of aspiration, difficult bag–m ask ventilation and tracheal intubation
and airway obstruction during emergence or recovery. When rescue tech-
niques were necessary in obese patients, they failed more often than in
the non- obese. Obesity needs to be recognised as a risk factor for airway
difficulty, and plans modified accordingly.10 A BMI >30 is an independent
predictor of difficult bag– mask ventilation.
The Society for Obesity and Bariatric Anaesthesia (SOBA) has issued
guidance on how to manage these patients. This includes:11
• Preoxygenation and intubation in the obese patient should be
performed with the patient in the head- up or ramped position. This
improves the efficacy of preoxygenation, maximises the time before
desaturation, reduces the risk of reflux and reduces the incidence of
difficult intubation close to that of the non- obese population.
• Obesity is a weak risk factor for difficult intubation, and predictors of
difficulty are generally the same as for normal- weight patients.
• i work of breathing and early airway closure occurring during tidal
ventilation suggest that obese patients should not be allowed to breathe
spontaneously for anything other than the shortest procedure. These
patients will desaturate rapidly, so the time interval from induction of
anaesthesia to assisted ventilation of the lungs should be minimised.
Caution should be exercised using high- flow O delivery systems to
2
increase the apnoea time of obese patients, as the evidence of safety is
lacking.
• Caution should be taken with the use of supraglottic airway devices
(SAds) in patients with a BMI >35kg/ m2.
• Tracheal extubation in an obese patient should likewise be performed in
the head- up position, with the patient awake.
• Problems usually occur because of poor planning, choice of technique
or inadequate preparation. Morbidly obese patients should be managed
by an experienced anaesthetist as part of an experienced team.
Videolaryngoscopy has a high success rate in morbidly obese patients.
Second- generation SAds should be available in case of failed intubation.

<!-- Page 98 -->
PrACTICALITIeS WITh OBeSe PATIeNTS 77
Practicalities with obese patients
The patient’s high BMI should be discussed at the safety brief, along with the
specific preparations required:
• Trained staff
• Number of staff
• Manual handling
• Operating table and adjuncts
• Monitoring
• Patient position
• Airway management.
Patients, if able, can walk directly into theatre and anaesthesia is induced on
the operating table, reducing manual handling risk. Operating tables with
the appropriate maximum weight allowance must be used.
• A hover mattress underneath the patient is very helpful to facilitate
patient transfer post- surgery.
• There must be enough trained and experienced staff in theatre to assist
with moving the patient, should it become necessary.
• Standard monitoring should include a correct- sized BP cuff. This may
be impossible in the normal upper arm position in many patients.
Using a forearm cuff is virtually always possible instead and, although
not validated, is effective and used by many bariatric anaesthetists as
standard.
• Invasive arterial catheters are rarely needed, unless for CVS indications.
• Venous cannulation is often difficult. CVCs may be necessary.
• Calf compression devices should be used, and particular care given to
pressure areas to prevent sores and nerve injury.
Patient positioning is very important. ‘Sniffing the morning air’ position may
be difficult to achieve due to the large soft tissue mass of the neck and chest
wall. A ramped position is ideal, and many adjuncts to achieve this are com-
mercially available.
• Preoxygenation in the head-u p position will slow the rapid desaturation
that can occur when supine.
• Awake fibreoptic intubation (AFOI) should be considered in any
patients who have a history or clinical signs suggestive of airway
problems. If the patient is preoxygenated to an end-t idal O (eTO)
2 2
>90%, then minimal bagging will be needed while waiting for the muscle
relaxant to take effect.
• high- flow O delivery systems can be used safely for preoxygenation
2
but offer no advantage to face mask oxygenation to an eTO >90%.
2
• Use of short- acting anaesthetic agents, such as remifentanil, or a
total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) technique with propofol and
remifentanil, aids rapid recovery from anaesthesia and minimise
postoperative hypoventilation and hypoxaemia.
• Monitoring of NMB is essential, as incomplete reversal of
neuromuscular- blocking agents (NMBAs) is problematic in the obese.
• The use of rocuronium should be considered because it can be fully
reversed with sugammadex.
A single sheet guideline (Fig. 4.1) on anaesthesia for the obese patient has
been produced by the SOBA.

<!-- Page 99 -->
78
78 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations

<!-- Page 99 Table -->
|  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |

<!-- Page 100 -->
PrACTICALITIeS WITh OBeSe PATIeNTS 79
desaeler
,noitide
9102
.enilediuG
teehS
elgniS
ABOS
ehT
.ABOS
,tneitap
esebo
eht
rof
aisehtseanA
1.4
.giF
/ku.oc.kuabos.www
//:sptth
M
.0202
KU
ABOS
©
,enilediuG
teehs
elgnis
ABOS
morf
noissimrep
htiw
defiidoM
.9102
ced
1 -senilediug

<!-- Page 100 Table -->
|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
