# Chapter 3: Preoptimisation

> 來源頁面: 101-130

---

<!-- Page 101 -->
80
80 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Pharmacology in obese patients
• recommendations on which weight to use for calculating drug doses in
various classes of drug are found on the SOBA one- page guideline (see
also % p. 79).
• Lean body weight is a part of the body composition that is defined as
the difference between total body weight and body fat weight. This
exceeds the ideal body weight (IBW) in the obese and plateaus at 100kg
for a man and at 70kg for a woman.
• The IBW in kg can be calculated by the Broca formula:
• Man: height in cm minus 100 ± 10%
• Woman: height in cm minus 105 ± 15%.
• Volume of distribution for drugs is altered due to a smaller proportion
of total body water (TBW), a greater proportion of adipose tissue, i
lean body mass and i blood volume and CO.
• hydrophilic drugs (e.g. competitive neuromuscular blockers such as
rocuronium, vecuronium and atracurium) have similar absolute volumes
of distribution, clearance and elimination half-l ives. Base the dose on the
lean body weight.
• Lipophilic drugs (e.g. thiopental, propofol, opioids and benzodiazepines)
have i volumes of distribution, normal clearance and i elimination
half- lives. Titrate to CO, which equates to the lean body weight in a fit
patient.
• i plasma cholinesterase activity. Suxamethonium dose should be based
on the total body weight to a maximum of 200mg.
Suxamethonium may appear to be the NMBA of choice for induction of
anaesthesia in obese patients,12 due to their reduced safe apnoea time; its
rapid onset allows rapid tracheal intubation. however, one study demon-
strated that the use of suxamethonium was associated with more rapid
desaturation, when compared to rocuronium, for rSI.13

<!-- Page 102 -->
ThrOMBOPrOPhyLAxIS IN OBeSITy 81
Thromboprophylaxis in obesity
(See also % p. 59; % p. 72.)
Obesity and surgery are known risk factors for VTe, but there is limited
information about the independent effects of obesity on the incidence of
postoperative VTe. The Million Women Study14 concluded that VTe risk
increases with increasing BMI and the associated excess risk is much greater
following surgery than without surgery. In the UK, NICe has offered guid-
ance on VTe prophylaxis in its publication Venous thromboembolism in over
16s: reducing the risk of hospital-a cquired deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary
embolism, last updated in August 2019.15
Start mechanical VTe prophylaxis on admission. Choose any one of:
• Antiembolism stockings (thigh or knee length)
• Intermittent pneumatic compression devices (thigh or knee length).
Continue mechanical VTe prophylaxis until the patient no longer has signifi-
cantly reduced mobility.
Add pharmacological VTe prophylaxis for patients who have a low risk
for major bleeding, taking into account individual patient factors and ac-
cording to clinical judgement.
This should continue until the patient no longer has significantly reduced
mobility (minimum 7d). Some bariatric surgical centres in the UK use ex-
tended prophylaxis for up to 3w and others use a higher dosage. There
has been no guidance on the duration or dosing for the obese. Therefore,
local guidelines must be consulted when considering VTe prophylaxis in
this group.

<!-- Page 103 -->
82
82 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
The malnourished patient
Malnutrition affects a large proportion of patients with chronic disease—
25% of those with COPd and 80% of patients with pancreatic or head
and neck malignancy.16,17 It affects many hospitalised patients in the western
world, as well as being a major global issue.18
Definition: imbalance between supply of essential nutrients and energy and
body’s requirements for cellular growth, maintenance and function.18
It is associated with i morbidity and infection, poor wound healing, pres-
sure ulceration, prolonged hospital stay, an i incidence of ICU requirement,
readmission to hospital and mortality.16 The causes of malnutrition are out-
lined below (Table 4.2).17,18
Table 4.2 Causes of malnutrition
Starvation environmental: poverty, food scarcity, poor access,
war, natural disasters
Patient: inability to eat (e.g. maxillofacial deformities)
Cachexia COPd, heart failure, cancer (e.g. pancreatic, head and
neck), chronic kidney disease, liver disease, rheumatoid
arthritis, Alzheimer’s disease, cystic fibrosis, infectious
diseases
Mental health depression, schizophrenia, anorexia nervosa
Absorption problems Inflammatory bowel conditions, short gut syndrome,
coeliac disease, hyperemesis, intestinal worms
Critical illness Post- surgery, ICU admission, burns
(See also % Obesity introduction, p.70.)

<!-- Page 104 -->
CAChexIA reLATed TO Chr ONIC ILLNeSS Or MALIGNANCy 83
Cachexia related to chronic illness or
malignancy
excessive weight loss in the setting of ongoing disease, with dispropor-
tionate muscle wasting. highly predictive of mortality. i proinflammatory
cytokines19 lead to d muscle protein synthesis, i proteolysis, i lipolysis, a
negative energy balance and weight loss. Not corrected by nutritional sup-
port alone. Affects multiple organ systems. Patients require careful assess-
ment and management (Boxes 4.2 and 4.3).19,20
Complications18
• Central nervous system (CNS): d cognitive function, fatigue, weakness
• Metabolic/ GI: gastric distension and delayed emptying time. i cortisol
and catecholamines. hypoglycaemia when BMI falls <13kg/m 2
• Musculoskeletal: abnormal bone density and i risk of fractures,
hypothermia, d muscle mass
• respiratory: d muscle function and strength, spontaneous
pneumothorax
• haematological: pancytopenia (anaemia and immunodeficiency)
• CVS: d CO and LV ejection fraction (eF), d BP, d heart rate (hr), loss
of cardiac muscle, mitral prolapse, i corrected QT interval, i vagal
tone, ST depression/ T wave inversion
• renal: d glomerular filtration rate (GFr), proteinuria, TBW higher, i
urea.
Box 4.2 Diagnostic criteria for cachexia
• Unintentional weight loss ≥5%
• BMI:
• <20kg/ m2 in those aged <65y
• <22kg/ m2 in those aged ≥65y
• Albumin <35g/ L
• Low fat- free mass
• evidence of cytokine excess, e.g. i C- reactive protein (CrP)
reproduced from Morley Je et al. (2006). Cachexia: pathophysiology and clinical review.
American Journal Clinical Nutrition, 83, 735– 43 with permission from Oxford University Press.
Box 4.3 European Society for Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolism risk factors for severe undernutrition
At least one of the following:
• Weight loss >10– 15% within 6mo
• BMI <18.5kg/ m2
• Subjective Global Assessment Grade C (severely malnourished)
• Serum albumin <30g/ L (no hepatic/ renal dysfunction)
Source: data from hirose K, et al. (2014). Perioperative management of severe anorexia ner-
vosa. BJA, 112 (2), 246– 54. M https:// www.espen.org/ files/ eSPeN- guideline_ Clinical- nutrition-
in- surgery.pdf

<!-- Page 105 -->
84
84 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Anaesthetic approach18
Preoperative
• Nutritional assessment:
• history: disease, infections, surgery, recent weight loss, caloric intake,
relevant drugs
• examination: appearance, hydration status, CVS examination, BMI
• Investigation: bloods (FBC, urea and electrolytes (U&e), liver function
tests (LFTs), calcium (Ca2+), phosphate, magnesium (Mg2+), glucose,
transferrin, albumin), urine (protein and ketones), eCG, echo if
appropriate
• Tools: Nutritional risk Assessment Scale, Subjective Global
Assessment.5 Practically, these can be time-c onsuming.
• Nutritional optimisation where possible, especially in leucopenia
or hypoalbuminaemia. In severe malnutrition (Box 4.3), 7–1 4d of
preoperative parenteral nutrition is advisable, especially if gut function
is unlikely to return to normal postoperatively.16,20 Only consider a delay
to surgery if severe malnutrition is present.16
• evidence suggests that preoperative carbohydrate drinks preserve
insulin sensitivity postoperatively and reduce length of stay. Limit
perioperative fasting where possible (induces metabolic stress and
impairs mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity)16.
• Correct electrolytes, including phosphate. hydrate the patient.
• Monitor and maintain blood glucose.
• Prokinetic and antacid recommended. Consider NGT.
Intraoperative
• Monitoring:
• have a low threshold for invasive cardiac monitoring (susceptibility to
cardiac arrhythmia or collapse).
• Consider continuous central temperature monitoring.
• Consider calibrated neuromuscular monitoring to minimise muscle
relaxant dose and monitor for prolonged effect.
• Venous access may be challenging. Central access may be required for
monitoring and nutritional support postoperatively.
• Induction may cause CVS collapse if underfilled.
• rapid sequence induction (rSI) recommended. Treat as having a full
stomach.
• Protect pressure areas and exposed nerves (reduced muscle mass and
soft tissue).
• Bony fragility; take care when moving/ positioning.
• Avoid hypothermia with warm fluids, forced air warming blanket, heat
and moisture exchanger (hMe).
• Avoid hyperventilation— can lower potassium (K+) further.
Pharmacology
• Pay attention to patient weight, lean and total body mass, albumin and
volume of distribution. Adjust doses appropriately.
• Muscle bulk may be reduced (reduce water-s oluble drug doses).
• Consider regional techniques to spare opioids and other drugs
metabolised by the liver.

<!-- Page 106 -->
CAChexIA reLATed TO Chr ONIC ILLNeSS Or MALIGNANCy 85
Postoperative
• extubation may be difficult (respiratory weakness and impaired upper
airway reflexes).
• Postoperative nutritional support: encourage early enteral feeding.
• Correct ph and electrolytes. Limit excessive fluids and opioids.
Prokinetics are recommended.
• have a low threshold for ICU if available.
• refeeding syndrome is a risk (see also % p. 87).
• Parenteral nutrition is reserved for those who cannot meet their
calorific needs within 7– 10d postoperatively (GI dysfunction, ileus,
bowel discontinuation).

<!-- Page 107 -->
86
86 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Anorexia nervosa
Chronic, severe, multisystem disorder with the highest morbidity and mor-
tality rate of any psychiatric disorder (up to 20%). BMI <17.5kg/m 2 is a
diagnostic criterion. Severe cases have BMI <13kg/ m2.20
Complications
• Metabolic/ GI: hypoglycaemia, liver injury, delayed gastric emptying.
excessive loss of sodium (Na+), K+, chloride and hydrogen ions
(h+) from the stomach, hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis and
hypokalaemia. Severe hypokalaemia is uncommon. Correct with
caution preoperatively. hypocalcaemia may accompany hypokalaemia.
• Musculoskeletal: osteopenia, osteoporosis, i risk of fractures and
hypothermia.
• respiratory: loss of lung elasticity, higher airway pressures.
• haematological: pancytopenia (anaemia and immunodeficiency).
• CVS: sinus bradycardia, d LV forces, orthostatic hypotension, mitral
prolapse, prolonged corrected QT interval, i vagal tone, pericardial
effusion, congestive heart failure, arrhythmia (very sensitive to
catecholamines or neostigmine). Cardiac arrest can occur 2° to
corrected QT interval prolongation or cardiac arrhythmia.
• renal: d GFr, proteinuria.
• Immunological: 1° cause of death is severe sepsis (especially very low
BMI). 3 Granulocyte stimulating factor can be used.
• endocrine: amenorrhoea, impaired thyroid function and glycaemic
control. May mimic panhypopituitarism.
Anaesthetic approach
Preoperative
• Full nutritional assessment (see also % p. 84), including psychiatric
assessment.
• Correct hypoglycaemia (cautiously and gradually; beware rebound
hyperinsulinaemia and profound hypoglycaemia).
• Acute refeeding can be risky. There is evidence that delaying surgery
to achieve BMI >14.5kg/ m2 improves hypoglycaemia and leucopenia,
which decreases mortality.20
• Correct other electrolytes, especially K+ and phosphate. replace Ca2+
and vitamin d.
Intraoperative
• Short, minimally invasive operations are better due to cardiac risk.
• rSI recommended. Fasting does not guarantee an empty stomach.
• reduce doses of NMBAs. Prolonged recovery 2° to hypokalaemia and
hypocalcaemia. Monitor neuromuscular block. Consider sugammadex
over neostigmine to reduce risk of cardiac arrhythmia.
• Carefully consider drug doses. Take into account patient weight,
hypoalbuminaemia (reduced protein binding) and renal and liver
function (reduced metabolism and excretion).
• Carefully maintain body temperature with forced air warming devices
and warmed infusions.
• Beware of positioning due to risk of pressure necrosis and nerve palsies.
• do not overfill. Can lead to pulmonary oedema and cardiac failure.

<!-- Page 108 -->
ANOrexIA NerVOSA 87
Postoperative
• Beware refeeding syndrome (hypophosphataemia, hypokalaemia,
hypomagnesaemia and hypoglycaemia in response to feeding after a
period of starvation) and use an appropriate refeeding regime with
nutritional support, cardiac monitoring, and electrolyte monitoring and
supplementation.
• As per the NICe- SUGAr study, avoid ‘intensive’ glucose control.20
• Be wary of postoperative infection, with rigorous attention to the
surgical site infection bundle and care of vascular access.

<!-- Page 109 -->
88
88 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Short gut (bowel) syndrome
removal of half or more of the small bowel due to congenital or acquired
disease (necrotising enterocolitis, congenital defect, meconium ileus, intus-
susception, Crohn’s disease, ischaemic or traumatic bowel injury, malig-
nancy) or failure of existing gut to function.21,22
Complications
dehydration, severe malnourishment, anaemia, electrolyte disturbance,
chronic pain, thrombosis and long-t erm anticoagulation, high-o utput stoma,
complications relating to feeding lines or tubes, liver failure, kidney or gall-
stones, lactic acidosis.21,22
Nutritional deficits depend on the site of non- functioning bowel:
• duodenum: iron, water-s oluble B vitamins, vitamin C
• Jejunum: carbohydrate, fat, protein, folate
• Ileum: bile salts, fat- soluble vitamins A, d and e, vitamin B , Ca2+,
12
magnesium, zinc (terminal ileum).
Treatment
enteral, oral and parenteral nutrition, repletion of fluids and electrolytes,
supplemental vitamins. Intestinal transplant is offered to those who have
<1m of functioning small bowel who develop complications of parenteral
nutrition.
Anaesthetic approach
These are usually high-r isk patients who are often home or hospital-b ound.
Assessment should be carried out via a multidisciplinary team to assess CVS
fitness, risk profile and vascular access strategy.21 Intestinal transplants take
place in specialist tertiary centres. Patients requiring other surgical proced-
ures need to be handled with a similar level of attention to detail and a
considered approach.

<!-- Page 110 -->
CONSIderATIONS FOr The OLder PATIeNT 89
Considerations for the older patient
‘elderly’ arbitrarily refers to patients >65y. They comprise the most rap-
idly expanding demographic of the surgical population. Age-r elated
physiological and cognitive decline, comorbidity and frailty all contribute
to the higher risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality among older
patients. Great care should be taken when prescribing or giving drugs to
older patients, as polypharmacy is common and both pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics are influenced by age.
Ageing is associated with progressive functional deterioration in all
systems, the effects of which may be compounded by organ-s pecific
comorbidity.
Cardiovascular
• Significant CVS disease is present in 50– 65% of patients.
• Myocardial fibrosis and ventricular wall thickening occur, reducing
ventricular compliance. Small changes in filling may have major effects
upon CO and BP.
• Atrial fibrillation (AF) is common and reduces stroke volume through
loss of the atrial component of ventricular filling.
• Maximal CO with exercise decreases by 71% per year from the 5th
decade.
• reduced arterial compliance causes systolic hypertension and widened
pulse pressure.
• reduced autonomic responsiveness impairs CVS responses to
hypotension. The hypotensive effect of anaesthetic agents is therefore
likely to be more pronounced.
• Capillary permeability is i, leading to a greater risk of pulmonary
oedema.
• The thirst response to reduced extracellular fluid (eCF) volume and i
plasma osmolality is reduced, increasing susceptibility to fluid depletion.
Respiratory
• Ventilatory responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia decline.
Postoperative apnoea is more common. Ventilatory reserve declines.
• O consumption and CO production fall by 10– 15% by the 7th decade.
2 2
Patients are able to tolerate a longer period of apnoea following
preoxygenation and minute volume requirement is reduced.
• Loss of elastic recoil increases pulmonary compliance, but chest wall
compliance falls due to degenerative changes in joints. Therefore, total
thoracic compliance may fall.
• Loss of septa increases the alveolar dead space. Closing volume
increases to exceed the FrC in the upright posture in patients >65y,
resulting in venous admixture. Thus, normal arterial partial pressure of
oxygen (PaO) falls steadily [(13.3 – age/ 30) kPa or (100 – age/ 4)
2
mmhg].
• Airway protective reflexes decline, increasing the risk of postoperative
pulmonary aspiration.
• In edentulous patients, maintaining a patent airway and face mask seal
can be difficult. Leaving false teeth in situ may help.

<!-- Page 111 -->
90
90 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Renal
• renal mass and the number of glomeruli fall progressively (by 30%
in the 8th decade), resulting in reduced GFr. CC falls comparably,
although serum creatinine may not rise because of d production from
reduced muscle mass (see % p. 192).
• Tubular function deteriorates, leading to reduced renin–a ldosterone
response, antidiuretic hormone (Adh) sensitivity and concentrating
ability. As a result, all renal homeostatic functions deteriorate,
rendering elderly patients more susceptible to both fluid overload and
hypovolaemia. hypo- and hypernatraemia are also more likely.
• reduced clearance of renally excreted drugs necessitates dose
adjustment. Particular care must be taken with potentially nephrotoxic
drugs such as aminoglycosides.
Hepatic
• hepatic mass and blood flow fall by up to 40% by the 9th decade.
Although cellular function is relatively well preserved in healthy patients,
the reduction in size reduces clearance and prolongs the effect of drugs
that are metabolized and excreted by the liver. These include opioids,
propofol, benzodiazepines and NMBAs.
Central nervous system
• Brain size and neuronal mass decrease. The average brain weight falls
by 18% between the ages of 30 and 80y. Mild cognitive impairment
may progress to dementia, which affects 10% of patients over 65y of
age, and 20% of those over 80y. It is important to distinguish between
dementia and reversible confusional states due to hypoxia, sepsis, pain,
metabolic derangement and depression. The hospital environment can
precipitate anxiety and confusion.
• The elderly have fewer requirements for opioids and sedatives and
are more susceptible to opioid- induced depressed consciousness and
respiration. This is likely to be due to both pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic effects. Pain threshold may be i.
• Postoperative delirium (POd) and postoperative neurocognitive
disorder (PONd, formerly postoperative cognitive dysfunction
(POCd)) are common in the elderly, occurring in >10% of patients.
disturbances of cerebral perfusion and cellular oxygenation are likely
to be contributory factors. Potentially reversible risk factors for POd
include severe pain, infection, malnutrition, electrolyte imbalance,
dehydration, environmental disturbances and substance withdrawal
(alcohol, medication).
• PONd describes significant perioperative decline in mental status or
awareness, occurring up to 30d (delayed neurocognitive recovery)
or 12mo (PONd) after surgery, and which may persist beyond that.
It is associated with i mortality, impaired quality of life and loss of
employment.
• PONd is more common after major surgery, cardiac surgery
and emergency surgery. Multifactorial causes are likely, related to
inflammatory reactions, altered hormonal homeostasis and/o r direct
anaesthetic agent toxicity. Focused anaesthesia interventions (treatment
of hypoxaemia and hypotension), guided by the depth of anaesthesia
and cerebral saturation monitoring, may ameliorate these.

<!-- Page 112 -->
CONSIderATIONS FOr The OLder PATIeNT 91
Endocrine
• Glucose loading is increasingly poorly tolerated in elderly patients. The
incidence of dM rises to 25% in patients >80y.
Haematology and the immune system
• hypercoagulability and dVT are more common with advancing age.
• Anaemia is more common, and the response of the marrow to anaemia
is impaired.
• Immune responses are reduced in the elderly, putting them at i risk of
infection. This is due to reduced bone marrow and splenic mass with
loss of the thymus.
Thermoregulation
• Thermoregulation is impaired, increasing the risk of hypothermia.
• Postoperative shivering increases skeletal muscle O consumption, while
2
vasoconstriction increases myocardial work and O demand.
2
Pharmacology
• TBW is reduced, while fat percentage is i. The volume of distribution
of water- soluble drugs is reduced, reducing dose requirements, while
that of lipid- soluble drugs is i, which may prolong clearance.
• The initial volume of distribution falls because of reduced CO. This
reduces the dose requirement and is particularly relevant for induction
agents. Arm–b rain circulation time is prolonged, increasing the time
taken for induction agents to take effect.
• reduced plasma albumin concentration decreases the dose requirement of
drugs such as benzodiazepines and opioids, which are bound to albumin.
• The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of inhaled agents
decreases steadily with age (6% reduction per decade) and is reduced
by around 40% by the age of 80y (see % pp. 411–12). This may be
related to a reduction in neuronal mass. reductions in blood/ gas
partition coefficient and CO in the elderly result in shorter onset time.
• The risk of GI bleeding due to NSAIds is i. These agents may also
contribute to the development of AKI in the presence of impaired renal
perfusion. ACe inhibitors exacerbate this risk. Fluid retention due to
NSAIds may precipitate heart failure in susceptible patients.

<!-- Page 113 -->
92
92 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Anaesthesia for older patients
Perioperative mortality increases with age, ASA status and the type and
urgency of surgery. The 30d mortality after hip fracture surgery is 76.5%
in the UK (see also % pp. 642–4), and after emergency laparotomy 74% in
those aged 50, rising by 74% per decade. Outcome is improved by thorough
multidisciplinary preoperative assessment, choice of an anaesthetic tech-
nique appropriate to the patient’s condition and meticulous perioperative
care aimed at minimising physiological disturbance.
Preoperative assessment and management
• A systematic review is vital. In patients who have sustained a fracture,
an underlying medical cause for a fall should be sought.
• day surgery is particularly appropriate for fit patients undergoing minor
surgery, as it minimises the disorientation associated with a change of
environment.
• The level of physical activity that can be sustained is a useful indicator of
cardiorespiratory fitness but is often limited by joint disease.
• The mental state should be evaluated. The abbreviated mental test or
Mini- Mental State examination may be useful in differentiating dementia
from acute confusional states.
• Consideration should be given to preoptimisation of medical conditions.
This may require cross-s pecialty involvement and high dependency
care. The benefits of delaying surgery, while this takes place, should be
balanced against the risks, particularly in non- elective surgery. In patients
with lower limb fractures, a delay in mobilisation may increase the risk
of pressure sores, dVT and pneumonia.
• With the exception of oral hypoglycaemics, regular medications should
be continued until the time of surgery. Alcohol should not be withheld
the day before surgery, and nicotine patches may be helpful in smokers.
Sedative premedications should generally be avoided, particularly
benzodiazepines, centrally acting anticholinergics and pethidine. Antacid
prophylaxis should be considered. Maintaining β- blockade may reduce
the risk of MI.
Frailty
• Frailty defines patients with reduced physiological capacity to
compensate effectively for external stressors such as illness and surgery.
• Frail patients are at greater risk of adverse outcomes, including
prolonged hospital stay, institutionalisation, worsening disability
and death.
• Frailty is more common in older people (10% >65y, 40% >85y), but age
is only one of numerous factors (e.g. comorbidity, strength, cognition)
used to derive predictive scoring tools.
• Several scoring tools can be used to identify frailty and monitor changes
in frailty over time (e.g. rockwood and edmonton). These can be useful
prognostic tools and can be used to provide older, vulnerable patients
with information and reassurance about perioperative care based on
their individual needs.

<!-- Page 114 -->
ANAeSTheSIA FOr OLder PATIeNTS 93
Nutrition
• Nutritional status is frequently poor in older people, under-r ecognised
by clinicians and compounded by a lack of appetite resulting from
surgery, pain and nausea.
• Perioperative complications and length of hospital stay may be reduced
by nutritional supplementation prior to major surgery.
Perioperative management
• The type of anaesthesia appears less important than the care with
which it is given with regard to the patient’s physiological condition.
however, regional anaesthesia may reduce bleeding, risk of dVT,
respiratory infection and cognitive dysfunction (particularly if given
without/ with minimal sedation). MAC should be age-a djusted or, if
using TIVA, infusions should be target-c ontrolled (TCI).
• Careful monitoring is necessary to detect hypotension during
GA induction and shortly after spinal anaesthesia administration.
Consideration should be given to invasive BP and depth of anaesthesia
monitoring. Prolonged arm– brain circulation time delays the onset of IV
induction agents; flush the drugs with 0.9% sodium chloride and remain
patient to avoid an inadvertent overdose.
• Temperature should be measured, and hypothermia prevented using
fluid warmers, active body- warming devices and elevation of ambient
temperature.
• Prolonged surgery and periods of hypotension increase the risk of
pressure sores. Care should be taken to reduce pressure with soft
padding. during long procedures, it is advisable to relieve pressure and
massage vulnerable areas intermittently.
Postoperative management
• high dependency facilities should be considered if this is likely to reduce
morbidity or mortality significantly, or if an identifiable organ support is
required.
• Fluid balance, vital signs, serum electrolytes and haematology must
be carefully monitored and treated appropriately. Patients with CVS
disease may need to have their hb kept >90– 100g/ L.
• reversible factors should be sought if the patient exhibits delirium
(pain, hypoxaemia, distended bladder, myocardial/c erebral ischaemia,
electrolyte disorder, drugs).
• Pain is common but undertreated in elderly surgical patients, particularly
if cognitively impaired. regular paracetamol prescription and regional
analgesia should always be considered and are preferable to opioids and
NSAIds.
• Anaesthetists should facilitate postoperative patient remobilisation and
‘re- enablement’ through age- appropriate anaesthesia, fluid therapy,
thermoregulation, analgesia and good communication.

<!-- Page 115 -->
94
94 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
When not to operate on older people
heroic curative surgery may not be appropriate if the chance of benefiting
the patient is felt to be very low. decisions regarding futility of surgery are
difficult and should be multidisciplinary and taken at consultant level, with
the involvement of the patient and their family. Palliative procedures to im-
prove the quality of life should be considered if the patient is adequately
prepared. These decisions must be carefully documented.
• Older patients must be assumed to have the mental capacity to make
decisions about their treatment.
• Access to surgical or critical care should not be rationed on the basis of
age.
Further reading
Griffiths r, Babu S, dixon P, et al. (2020). Guidelines for the management of hip fractures. Guidelines
from the Association of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia, 75, 85– 98.
White SM, Griffiths r, Baxter M, et al. (2019). Guidelines for the peri-o perative care of people with
dementia. Guidelines from the Association of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia, 74, 357– 72.
evered L, Silbert B, Knopman dS, et al.; Nomenclature Consensus Working Group (2018).
recommendations for the nomenclature of cognitive change associated with anaesthesia and
surgery— 2018. Br J Anaesth, 121, 1005– 12.
White SM, Altermatt F, Barry J, et al. (2018). International Fragility Fracture Network consensus
statement on the principles of anaesthesia for patients with hip fracture. Anaesthesia, 73, 863– 74.
dodds C, Kumar C, Veering B (2014). Oxford Textbook of Anaesthesia for the elderly Patient.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Griffiths r, Beech F, Brown A, et al.; Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (2014).
Peri- operative care of the elderly 2014: Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland.
Anaesthesia, 69(Suppl 1), 81– 98.
hubbard re, Story dA (2014). Patient frailty: the elephant in the operating room. Anaesthesia,
69(Suppl 1), 26– 34.
Nadelson Mr, Sanders rd, Avidan MS (2014). Perioperative cognitive trajectory in adults. Br J
Anaesth, 112, 440– 51.
Stoneham M, Murray d, Foss N (2014). emergency surgery: the big three—a bdominal aortic an-
eurysm, laparotomy and hip fracture. Anaesthesia, 69, 70– 80.

<!-- Page 116 -->
LeArNING dISABILITIeS ANd/Or AUTISM 95
Learning disabilities and/ or autism
The term learning disability encompasses a broad range of conditions char-
acterised by impairment in information processing.23
Approximately 1.5 million people in the UK have a mild, moderate or
severe learning disability.
These patients form a heterogeneous group, often with congenital or
acquired comorbidities, including craniofacial anomalies, congenital cardiac
disease and epilepsy. Comorbidity and other factors, such as i regurgita-
tion, aspiration and some patients’ sensitivity to opioids (e.g. those with
cerebral palsy), explain a relatively high risk of respiratory complications
perioperatively.
Patients with learning disabilities have i health care needs and also
often have behaviours that can challenge. An over- reliance on physical or
pharmacological restraint fails to address behavioural issues, which may be
exacerbated over repeated encounters with health professionals. The aim
must be to adopt the least restrictive approach to succeed. reasonable ad-
justments may have to be made to standard care pathways at any point in
the perioperative period to aid patient cooperation.
Communication for learning disability patients
• There should be clear signage within the hospital and ease of access
ensured for those with mobility problems.
• difficulty in communication is the source of most problems in the care
of learning disability patients. Some patients are non-v erbal. Others
have difficulties with the speech, social or emotional domains of
communication.
• hospital learning disability liaison services are an invaluable source of
knowledge and support for patients and carers. They serve to facilitate
communication and logistics for patients with learning disability.
• examine and perfect your own non-v erbal communication. Most
patients will read it very well.
• Use clear, precise instructions. Avoid metaphors, abstraction, jargon and
acronyms, as these are often not understood. Use signing systems, such
as Makaton®, with the aid of parents or carers if necessary. Intensive
interaction, such as mirroring, may reduce anxiety.
• Behavioural training can be effective in the preoperative period:
• Using text or visual descriptions, such as easy read and social stories
or objects of reference, helps to break down a new task into a series
of achievable objectives.
• desensitisation visits allow patients to attend the hospital and leave
without any procedures being performed. Ideally this leaves the
patient with a positive view of the hospital for future care.
• Prior use of three- dimensional (3d) immersive videos enables
patients to take a virtual tour of the journey to theatre and the
anaesthetic room and can reduce anxiety on the day of admission.

<!-- Page 117 -->
96
96 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Autistic spectrum disorder
• Autistic spectrum disorder (ASd) has been defined as a persistent
deficit in social communication, interaction and imagination.23
• About 50% of patients with ASd will have a learning disability.
• ♂:♀ is now recognised as closer to 3:1. Girls are more difficult
to diagnose, as they often display social camouflaging. ASd has a
prevalence of 1.5% and an onset usually by 3y, but diagnosis is often
delayed.
• restrictive, repetitive behaviours are often recognised first.
• No clear aetiology, although a number of genetic variations and
perinatal risk factors have been identified.
• described as a ‘theory of mind’ deficit. ASd patients display an inability
to understand the impact of their behaviour on others and lack insight
into the perspectives or intentions of others.
• Patients typically have difficulties with verbal communication and/o r
non- verbal communication, particularly with social or emotional aspects
of interactions.
• ASd patients often have significant hyper- or hyposensory issues.
Communication points for patients with autistic spectrum
disorder
• Allow time for questions to be digested, and avoid causing confus ion
with repeated questioning.
• reduced abstract thinking ability means non-l iteral communication is
often not understood.
• Patients often benefit from detailed, factual descriptions of each stage
of anaesthesia being broken down into small, achievable steps.
• Patients may become distressed if prevented from performing certain
repetitive, self- stimulatory behaviour such as hand- flapping, rocking,
spinning or verbal repetition.
• Sensory dysregulation can have profound effects on autistic patients.
They can be deeply disturbed by touch and eye contact. Keep noise
down (including that from adjacent rooms); restrict numbers in the
room, and consider dimming the lights. They may not tolerate adhesive
dressings while awake. It may be necessary to attach monitoring
immediately after induction.
• debunking myths about ASd patients—t hey do feel pain, are often
tricky because they are scared, do tell jokes and can engage with guided
imagery.
Capacity and consent
• All patients should be presumed to have capacity unless an assess ment
has shown a lack of capacity.
• regardless of the level of capacity, every effort should be made to
provide information to patients in a format they can understand.
• Consenting requires detailed knowledge of the Mental Capacity Act
(2005)/A dults with Incapacity Act (2000) in Scotland.
• elective best interest meetings are held to gather the views of family
and carers, so as to understand the patient’s perceptions and beliefs
and the conditions that will be acceptable. If there is nobody suitable

<!-- Page 118 -->
AUTISTIC SPeCTrUM dISOrder 97
to help make decisions about medical treatment, an Independent
Mental Capacity Advocate will be required. Best interest meetings
enable discussion about additional risks and reasonable adjustments to
treatment.
• In an emergency, two clinicians involved with the patient’s care may
reach a medical best interests decision.
• The appropriate consent form must be used for a patient who lacks
capacity, signed by the 1° decision- maker for the procedure, not
necessarily by the clinician delivering it.
Preoperative preparation
• hospitals must provide training and policies specific to learning disability
and ASd patients.
• Patients with a learning disability or ASd should not be denied
treatment because of their disability if that treatment is in their best
interests.
• Systems must identify patients early to create bespoke care plans, with
multidisciplinary and liaison team involvement.
• Combining multiple planned treatments or investigations under a single
GA is beneficial, e.g. imaging, dental procedures and vaccinations.
• Parents and carers should be actively involved. They are an invalua-
ble source of information on specific anxieties, triggers and beneficial
behavioural modifications.
• request care ‘passports’ which contain individualised information.
• Comprehensive preoperative assessment and history are essential. Use
opportunistic observations for airway/p hysical assessments.
• Many congenital conditions associated with learning disability have
multisystem sequelae, so a comprehensive systems enquiry is essential.
Perioperative plan
• Patients with a learning disability or ASd should ideally be first on the
operating list, with steps taken to reduce delays and waiting times.
• Maintain a calm, quiet environment. Where possible and safe, ad-
justments should be made to accommodate patient preferences such
as dimmed lighting, own clothes and parents/ carers supporting them in
the anaesthetic room.
• A sedative/ anxiolytic premedication or clinical holding may be
advisable. Use an appropriate technique, dependent on your team’s
experience. Some suggested doses are shown in Table 4.3.
• Midazolam is beneficial for its anxiolytic effect but may not be sedative,
especially in ASd. Ketamine is useful for dissociation in adult patients
when more sedation is required. It should be used with caution in
epilepsy due to reduced seizure thresholds.
• Best interest meetings may identify some patients who require
premedication at home or in the hospital car park. risk:benefit
assessments take into account constraints, e.g. monitoring pertaining to
these locations.
• Inhalational induction is often preferable, avoiding the stress of awake
IV cannulation. Maintenance of anaesthesia may then be switched to
the IV route. Indeed, there is increasing evidence of reduced emergence
delirium or ASd rages (recovery meltdown) with TIVA.
• Multimodal analgesia optimises pain control and reduces opioid use.

<!-- Page 119 -->
98
98 ChAPTer 4 At-risk populations
Table 4.3 Premedication regimes
Effect Drug Route Dose Max dose
Anxiolysis Midazolam PO/ IM 0.5mg/ kg 30mg
Sedation ++ Clonidine PO/ IM 2– 4 micrograms/ kg 150micrograms
(inpatient)
Sedation and Ketamine PO/ IM 2– 3mg/ kg 300mg
dissociation (day case)
Postoperative
• As for induction, emergence from anaesthesia should involve minimal
physical or sensory stimulation. early presence of carers/f amily in
recovery is often invaluable.
• IV cannulae and selected monitoring should be removed as soon as it is
safe to do so, to reduce patient distress.
• Communication difficulties frequently impede pain assessment.
• Always consider pain (while excluding hypoxia) as a source of i
agitation. Behavioural serial pain scoring systems are often beneficial.
• ASd patients may experience explosive behavioural ‘meltdowns’.
Triggers include disorientation, sensory or communication issues, feeling
out of control and anxiety. Be aware of each individual’s warning signs
and minimise stimulation on waking.
• Modify discharge criteria (e.g. eating/d rinking) to allow patients to
return to their own routine and environment as soon as possible.
• discharge documentation, instructions and prescriptions should be
completed in advance to facilitate a potentially abrupt discharge.

<!-- Page 120 -->
AUTISTIC SPeCTrUM dISOrder 99
Further reading
Lyall K, Croen L, daniels J, et al. (2017). The changing epidemiology of autism spectrum disorders.
Annu Rev Public Health, 38, 81– 102.
Short J, Calder A (2013). Anaesthesia for children with special needs, including autistic spectrum
disorder. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 13, 107– 12.
References
1 health and Social Care Information Centre, Lifestyles Statistics (2014). Statistics on
obesity, physical activity and diet: england, 2014. Data quality statement. M https://
digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/health-survey-for-england/
health-survey-for-england-2014
2 Organisation for economic Co- operation and development (OeCd) (2017). Obesity update.
M https:// www.oecd.org/ health/ obesity- update.htm
3 Chapman dG, Irvin CG, Kaminsky dA, dixon Ae (2020). Weight loss reduces airway closure
during bronchoconstriction in obese asthmatics. Am J Resp Crit Care Med, 187, A3791.
4 Lindsay rS, howard BV (2004). Cardiovascular risk associated with the metabolic syndrome.
Curr Diab Rep, 4, 63– 8.
5 Arabi yM, dara SI, Tamim hM, et al.; Cooperative Antimicrobial Therapy of Septic Shock
(CATSS) database research Group (2013). Clinical characteristics, sepsis interventions and out-
comes in the obese patients with septic shock: an international multicenter cohort study. Crit
Care, 17, r72.
6 habbu A, Lakkis NM, dokainish h (2006). The obesity paradox: fact or fiction? Am J Cardiol,
98, 944– 8.
7 eichinger S, hron G, Bialonczyk C, et al. (2008). Overweight, obesity, and the risk of recurrent
venous thromboembolism. Arch Intern Med, 168, 1678.
8 hall A (2015). Sleep physiology and the perioperative care of patients with sleep disorders.
Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 4, 167– 72.
9 Singh M, Liao P, Kobah S, et al. (2013). Proportion of surgical patents with undiagnosed ob-
structive sleep apnoea. Br J Anaesth, 110, 629– 36.
10 Cook T, Woodall N, Frerk C (2011). Major complications of airway management in the United
Kingdom: results of the 4th National Audit Project of the royal College of Anaesthetists and the
difficult Airway Society. M http:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ nap4
11 Nightingale Ce, Margarson MP, Shearer e, et al. (2015). Perioperative management of the obese
surgical patient. Anaesthesia, 70, 859– 76.
12 Ingrande J, Lemmens hMJ (2010). dose adjustment of anaesthetics in the morbidly obese. Br J
Anaesth, 105, i16– 23.
13 Taha SK, el-K hatib MF, Baraka AS, et al. (2010). effect of suxamethonium vs rocuronium on onset
of oxygen desaturation during apnoea following rapid sequence induction. Anaesthesia, 65, 358– 61.
14 Parkin L, Sweetland S, Balkwill A, et al.; Million Women Study Collaborators (2012). Body mass
index, surgery, and risk of venous thromboembolism in middle-a ged women: a cohort study.
Circulation, 125, 1897– 904.
15 National Institute for health and Care excellence (2018, updated August 2019). Venous
thromboembolism in over 16s: reducing the risk of hospital-a cquired deep vein thrombosis or
pulmonary embolism. NICe guideline [NG89]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng89
16 Ali Abdelhamid y, Chapman MJ, deane AM (2016). Peri- operative nutrition. Anaesthesia,
71(Suppl 1), 9– 18.
17 NhS (2017). health A–Z : Malnutrition. M http:// www.nhs.uk/ conditions/ malnutrition/ causes/
18 edwards S (2016). Anaesthetising the malnourished patient. Update Anaesth, 31, 31– 7.
19 Morley Je, Thomas dr, Wilson MG (2006). Cachexia: pathophysiology and clinical review. Am J
Clin Nutr, 83, 735– 43.
20 hirose K, hirose M, Tanaka K, Kawahito S, Tamaki T, Oshita S (2014). Perioperative manage-
ment of severe anorexia nervosa. Br J Anaesth, 112, 246– 54.
21 Lomax S, Klucniks A, Griffiths J (2011). Anaesthesia for intestinal transplant. Contin Educ Anaesth
Crit Care Pain, 11, 1– 4.
22 Szczygiel B, Jonkers-S chuitema CF, Naber T (2010). Basics in clinical nutrition: nutritional support
in extensive gut resections (short bowel). e-S PEN, the European e-J ournal of Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolism, 5, e63– 8. M https:// clinicalnutritionespen.com/ article/ S1751- 4991(09)00052- 3/ pdf
23 World health Organization (2018). International classification of diseases for mortality and mor-
bidity statistics, 11th revision. M https:// icd.who.int/ browse11/ l- m/ en

<!-- Page 121 -->
010

<!-- Page 122 -->
Chapter 5 101
Cardiovascular disease
Sonja Payne
Ischaemic heart disease 102
Perioperative acute myocardial ischaemia and infarction 109
Heart failure 111
Hypertension 116
Valvular heart disease 118
Aortic stenosis 120
Aortic regurgitation 122
Mitral stenosis 124
Mitral regurgitation 126
Pericardial disease 128
Cardiomyopathy 129
Patients with a transplanted heart 132
James Ip
Congenital heart disease and non- cardiac surgery 134
Specific congenital heart disease lesions 136
Adults with congenital heart disease 138
Guillermo Martinez
Pulmonary hypertension 139
Sonja Payne
Perioperative arrhythmias 145
Narrow complex arrhythmias 147
Broad complex arrhythmias 152
Disturbances of conduction (heart block) 154
Pacemakers and defibrillators 160
Chapter reviewed by Tom Jackson
See also
% Cardiac disease and pregnancy pp. 891–2
% Severe bradycardia pp. 1060–1061
% Atrial fibrillation pp. 149–51
% Narrow complex tachycardia pp. 1062–1064
% Broad complex tachycardia p. 1062

<!-- Page 123 -->
012
102 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Ischaemic heart disease
Current Hospital episode Statistics data suggest that 735 000 patients die
each year in the UK within 30d of surgery. Major adverse cardiac events
(MACe) are the largest cause of perioperative deaths, accounting for at
least 30% of deaths.
Perioperative risk of myocardial ischaemia
CVS risk is influenced by both patient and surgical factors. Patient factors
are summarised in table 5.1.1
Table 5.1 Patient factors influencing perioperative risk of myocardial ischaemia
Major risk predictors MI <2mo prior to surgery
(markers of unstable
Unstable or severe angina
CAD)
Ongoing ischaemia after MI (clinical symptoms or non-
invasive testing)
Symptomatic heart failure with eF <40%
Significant arrhythmias (e.g. high- grade AV block,
symptomatic arrhythmias, or supraventricular
arrhythmias with uncontrolled ventricular rate)
Severe valvular heart disease
PCI (BMS <30d, DeS <1y, angioplasty <2w)
Intermediate risk History of IHD
predictors (markers of
Asymptomatic heart failure, reduced eF
stable CAD)
Heart failure with preserved eF (diastolic dysfunction)
History of cerebrovascular disease
Abnormal renal function
Diabetes
Minor risk predictors Advanced age
(i probability of heart
Abnormal eCG
disease)
rhythm other than sinus
Low functional capacity
Uncontrolled systemic hypertension
Smoking history
AV, atrioventricular; BMS, bare- metal stent; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; CAD, cor-
onary artery disease; DeS, drug-e luting stent; eCG, electrocardiogram; eF, ejection fraction; IHD,
ischaemic heart disease; LVeF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial infarction; PCI,
percutaneous coronary intervention.

<!-- Page 124 -->
ISCHAeMIC HeArt DISeASe 103
Functional capacity
Cardiopulmonary fitness is commonly used to estimate perioperative risk.
the physiological response to major surgery increases O demand by up to
2
40%, requiring a subsequent increase in O delivery. the ability to exercise
2
is an indicator of CVS reserve. It is expressed in metabolic equivalents of
task (Mets) (Box 5.1). One Met is the resting O consumption of a 40y-o ld
2
70kg ♂ (3.5mL/ kg/m in). Patients who cannot sustain 4 Mets of physical
activity frequently have adverse outcomes following high-r isk surgery (see
also % p. 35).
Mets are most commonly assessed subjectively, based on patient his-
tory, which may result in substantial misclassification of risk. More objective
measures, such as the Duke Activity Status Index (a self- reported question-
naire about usual physical activities) or CPet, have been shown to improve
identification of patients at risk of perioperative MACe and death.2
Surgical factors are also important in determining perioperative risk
(table 5.2).3
Box 5.1 Metabolic equivalents of common tasks
1– 4 Mets eating, dressing, dishwashing and walking around the
house
4– 10 Mets Climbing a flight of stairs, walking on level ground at
>6km/ h, running briefly, playing golf
>10 Mets Strenuous sports: swimming, singles tennis, football
Table 5.2 risk of ischaemic heart disease by type of surgery
High risk: Major emergency surgery
>5% death/ non- fatal MI Aortic/ major vascular surgery
Prolonged surgery with large fluid shifts
Intermediate risk: CeA/ eVAr
<5% death/ non- fatal MI Head and neck surgery
Intraperitoneal and intrathoracic surgery
Orthopaedic surgery
Prostatic surgery
Low risk: Minimally invasive endoscopic surgery
<1% death/ non- fatal MI Cataract extraction
Superficial surgery (including breast)
CeA, carotid endarterectomy; eVAr, endovascular aneurysm repair.

<!-- Page 125 -->
014
104 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Clinical risk indices
risk indices integrate patient and surgical factors, providing a quantitative
estimate of perioperative risk. the revised Cardiac risk Index (table 5.3)
is the most validated clinical risk index for prediction of major perioperative
cardiac complications.
Table 5.3 revised Cardiac risk Index
Variable Points
History of ischaemic heart disease 1
History of congestive heart failure 1
History of cerebrovascular disease 1
Use of insulin therapy for diabetes 1
Preoperative serum creatinine >177 micromoles/ L 1
High- risk surgery 1
total points: none = risk of MACe 3.9%; 1 = risk of MACe 6%; 2 = risk of MACe 10.1%; >2 =
risk of MACe 15%.
Source: data from Lee tH et al. Circulation. 1999;100:1043–9.
Perioperative testing
evaluation of patients with IHD depends on the planned surgery, facilities
and time available. Special investigations are discussed below. Precise re-
commendations remain controversial, but careful history, examination and
practical application of preoperative screening tests are important. Little
advantage is gained from complex examinations which will not alter man-
agement. the positive predictive value of most tests is low. In high-r isk
patients, alternative surgical procedures or medical management may need
to be considered, with input from anaesthetists, cardiologists, surgeons and
the patient.
Special investigations
12- lead electrocardiogram
A preoperative eCG should be performed on patients over 65y undergoing
intermediate- risk surgery and anyone with risk factors for IHD. Patients
with IHD may have a normal or non- specific resting eCG.
Cardiac biomarkers
• Preoperative measurement of BNP and cardiac troponins in the
perioperative period predicts myocardial injury after non-c ardiac
surgery (MINS) in patients undergoing non- cardiac surgery.
• Biomarker assessment may complement risk prediction in patients at
high risk of MACe.3,4
• Daily troponin measurements and postoperative eCGs for 48–7 2h
after non- cardiac surgery in patients at high risk of MACe may be
recommended to detect perioperative MINS, facilitating monitoring and
medical management.

<!-- Page 126 -->
ISCHAeMIC HeArt DISeASe 105
Assessment of LV function
• echocardiography is the most widely available test for diagnosis and
serial assessment of patients with dyspnoea or known LV dysfunction.
• Cardiac MrI provides reliable assessment of LV function, as well as
coronary artery evaluation.
Coronary CT angiography
A non-i nvasive alternative to coronary angiography. Calculates the
Coronary Artery Calcium Score which estimates risk of IHD and need for
invasive coronary angiography, but overestimates the risk of MACe, so is
not recommended for routine cardiac risk estimation.
Exercise ECG
A functional test in patients with known coronary artery disease (CAD).
Detects myocardial ischaemia through changes in St- segment morphology.
Interpretation is difficult if there are pre- existing St- segment abnormalities
and if the patient fails to achieve target Hr. High prevalence of false posi-
tives and negatives, so no longer used for CAD diagnosis. Of limited use for
risk prediction for postoperative MACe.
CPET
(See also % pp. 33–5.)
CPet is an integrative assessment of cardiovascular, respiratory and mus-
culoskeletal systems. It provides an objective assessment of functional cap-
acity. It takes 30min to perform but requires expensive equipment. It has a
low positive predictive value but may be used to guide perioperative SDM
in high- risk patients.
Pharmacological stress testing
Moderate/ large areas of reversible ischaemia are associated with i risk of
MACe. Pharmacological stress tests provide a dynamic assessment of myo-
cardial perfusion. A normal study has a high negative predictive value. High-
risk patients should be tested if testing will change management. Patients
who have large areas of reversible ischaemia should be considered for cor-
onary angiography.
• Myocardial perfusion imaging (thallium scintigraphy) uses a coronary
vasodilator (dipyridamole or adenosine) and a radioisotope,
thallium- 201, that rapidly accumulates within perfused myocardium.
Comparisons are made between resting and stress images. Changes
in uptake reflect reversible ischaemia, while fixed defects represent
irreversible infarcted/ scarred myocardium.
• Dobutamine stress echocardiography uses an increasing dose of
dobutamine (max 40 micrograms/k g/ min), with simultaneous two-
dimensional (2D) precordial echocardiography. New or worsening
regional wall motion abnormality (rWMA) is an indicator of impaired
perfusion.
• Stress cardiac MrI can incorporate dobutamine and vasodilator stress
testing principles to assess for rWMA and myocardial perfusion
abnormalities, helping predict the risk of future MACe.

<!-- Page 127 -->
016
106 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Preoperative coronary artery revascularisation
revascularisation may be percutaneous (angioplasty/s tent insertion) or
surgical.
Percutaneous coronary intervention
• Indicated preoperatively in patients with unstable IHD.
• recent PCI is associated with i MACe and 30d mortality.
• PCI causes trauma to the vessel wall, rendering the endoluminal surface
thrombogenic until the vessel wall has healed or the stent has re-
endothelialised. therefore, dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPt) with aspirin
and a P2Y12 inhibitor (e.g. clopidogrel or ticagrelor) is necessary to
prevent stent thrombosis.
• If a patient treated with DAPt post- PCI requires an operation where
bleeding may be problematic (e.g. intracranial surgery, spinal surgery,
open aortic surgery), and the operation cannot be deferred for an
appropriate time period, consider stopping clopidogrel/t icagrelor/
prasugrel for 5– 7d preoperatively. Cardiology advice may include
antiplatelet bridging with a short- acting platelet IIb/ IIIa glycoprotein
receptor antagonist (tirofiban, eptifibatide).
• Duration of DAPt is dependent on type of stent and associated acute
coronary syndrome at the time of stent insertion.
• Interruption of DAPt perioperatively is associated with a high cardiac
complication rate and requires multidisciplinary team discussion.
• recommendations for interrupting DAPt for non- cardiac surgery5 are:
bare- metal stent (BMS): delay for 1mo; drug- eluting stent (DeS): delay
depends on type of DeS, so liaise with cardiology. Continue aspirin
perioperatively whenever possible.
• If PCI is required prior to surgery, careful consideration should be given
to the type of stent inserted. For procedures that can be delayed by
12mo, it is reasonable to use a DeS. If the procedure can be delayed
for 6– 8w, a BMS can be used. If the condition requires surgery to
be performed in the next 2– 4w, consideration should be given to
performing balloon angioplasty.
Coronary artery bypass grafting
Indications for preoperative CABG are identical to those for CABG on med-
ical grounds, i.e. >50% left main stem stenosis, >70% two- or three- vessel
disease (including the proximal left anterior descending artery) and/o r
LV systolic dysfunction. elective surgery should be postponed for a min-
imum of 6w post- CABG.
Perioperative MACE risk modification
Patients are at risk of ischaemic events and MI in the perioperative period.
MI can be classified into five types:
• type 1: caused by an acute atherothrombotic coronary event
• type 2: heterogeneous aetiology, resulting from a condition other than
CAD contributing to an imbalance between O supply and demand
2
• types 3: relates to sudden unexplained cardiac death
• type 4: relates to MI associated with PCI
• type 5: relates to MI associated with cardiac surgery.

<!-- Page 128 -->
ISCHAeMIC HeArt DISeASe 107
About 75% of perioperative MIs are type 2,6 and the other 25% are
type 1. reduction of the risk of MACe requires a multimodal approach,
dependent on time available and patient engagement, but involves lifestyle
changes as well as pharmacological therapy.
• Medical therapy should be continued perioperatively to protect against
ischaemic stress. If GI absorption is impaired or the patient is kept nil by
mouth, drugs should be given IV if possible.
• Aspirin alone has not been shown to reduce MACe or 30d mortality in
patients undergoing non- cardiac surgery.3
• Long- term β- blockade should be continued perioperatively due to the
cardioprotective effects (decrease myocardial O demand).
2
• Initiation of β- blockade within 24h prior to surgery is not
recommended.4
• there is limited evidence to suggest that high-r isk patients who
demonstrate inducible ischaemia on preoperative stress testing may
benefit from carefully titrated β- blockade (to a Hr of 60– 80bpm)
started at least 1w prior to surgery. Low- dose bisoprolol is commonly
used. Dose titration is challenging.
• Nitrates should be continued perioperatively, IV or transdermally,
if necessary. there is no evidence that prophylactic administration
decreases the risk of perioperative cardiac complications.
• Calcium channel blockers should be continued preoperatively and
resumed as soon as possible postoperatively. Verapamil has been
shown to confer a small measure of cardiac protection in small rCts
but must be avoided in LV impairment.
• ACe inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ArBs) improve
survival following MI and in patients with LV dysfunction. they do not
protect against perioperative MACe. ACe inhibitors and ArBs have
been shown to increase the risk of intraoperative hypotension, but
not MACe. Other studies have shown clinically important hypotension
to be independently associated with an i risk of death, MI and CVe,
but the highest risk comes from hypotension 24h after surgery. It
has been suggested4 that withholding ACe inhibitors and ArBs 24h
before surgery and recommencing them 2d after surgery may be
appropriate, but the quality of evidence is currently low and these
drugs are very important in the management of these patients. Others
suggest stopping them only if used to treat hypertension.3 In those with
severe LV dysfunction, it may be prudent to continue ACe inhibitors
throughout the perioperative period. Cardiology advice may be needed.
• Perioperative statin administration has been shown to improve both
short- term and long- term cardiac outcome following non- cardiac and
coronary bypass surgery.3,4 Statins enhance plaque stability, making
plaque rupture less likely.

<!-- Page 129 -->
018
108 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Anaesthetic considerations
the main goal is to maintain O demand and supply matching.
2
• Consider 5- lead eCG monitoring.
• Invasive cardiovascular monitoring (arterial line ± central venous
pressure ± CO monitoring) should be considered for high-/
intermediate- risk patients.
• Point- of- care ultrasound can provide real- time assessment of
cardiovascular and respiratory function.
• Avoid hypotension, hypertension and tachycardia to minimise
myocardial demand and supply mismatching. Anticipate phases of
sympathetic stimulation (e.g. intubation, emergence) and consider using
a short- acting β- blocker to attenuate this.
• Pain causes sympathetic stimulation: provide effective pain control.
• Central neuraxial and regional blocks can be very effective, but not
always possible in the context of DAPt.
• Liberal transfusion triggers (Hb 90– 100g/ L) reduce the risk of MACe.7
• Consider admission to HDU postoperatively for close monitoring.

<!-- Page 130 -->
PerIOPerAtIVe ACUte MYOCArDIAL ISCHAeMIA & INFAr CtION 109
Perioperative acute myocardial ischaemia
and infarction
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI)
MI is defined pathologically as myocardial cell death due to prolonged is-
chaemia. AMI is universally defined as acute myocardial injury with clin-
ical evidence of acute myocardial ischaemia and detection of a dynamic
change in high- sensitivity cardiac troponin (ctnt) values. At least one other
ischaemic feature (symptoms, new eCG changes, new rWMA, new cor-
onary thrombus)8 is required for diagnosis. Perioperative AMI occurs in 4%
of adult inpatients undergoing non- cardiac surgery. Of these, nearly 10%
will die within 30d of surgery.9 typical ischaemic symptoms of AMI may be
masked by the effects of drugs and distracting surgical pain.
Serial cardiac troponin measurement is a cornerstone for AMI diagnosis.
Development of ctnt assays has improved overall diagnostic accuracy.
Myocardial injury releases cardiac troponins into the systemic circulation,
with ctnt levels rising within 3– 4h after onset of myocardial injury. Levels
remain i for 10–1 4d. A rise or fall (dynamic change) in ctnt implies an
acute event. At least one ctnt level above the 99th percentile of a normal
reference population is required for diagnosis of AMI.
Immediate management
• ensure you confirm the diagnosis: perform eCG, send ctnt blood
sample and consider point-o f- care ultrasound if available.
• reduce O demand: control Hr to low normal. Consider use of short-
2
acting β- blocker (esmolol 50– 200 micrograms/ kg/ min loading dose,
then 0.05– 0.2 micrograms/ kg/m in). If awake, opioids can reduce pain
associated with ischaemic symptoms.
• Optimise O delivery: maintain normotension. Attempt coronary artery
2
vasodilation with glyceryl trinitrate (GtN), either sublingual or IV.
Provide supplemental O. ensure adequate Hb concentration.
2
• In the anaesthetised patient, consider the need to abandon surgery.
• Consider administration of aspirin (NGt may be required).
• Consult cardiologist. Urgent/ emergent PCI may be warranted.
Myocardial injury after non-c ardiac surgery
MINS is defined as prognostically relevant myocardial injury due to ischaemia
that occurs during or within 30d after non-c ardiac surgery, including, but not
limited to, patients who have had an MI. MINS occurs in nearly 20% of
patients undergoing inpatient non- cardiac surgery and is an independent
predictor of postoperative adverse cardiac events and death.8,10 More than
90% of MINS events occur in the absence of clinical signs or symptoms of
ischaemia11 and only 20% will fulfil the universal definition for MI.
Diagnostic criteria8,10
• ctnt level ≥65 nanograms/ L (or 20– 64 nanograms/ L, with absolute
change of 5 nanograms/ L) or non- ctnt ≥30 nanograms/ L
• Occurring within 30d of non- cardiac surgery
• Not due to non-i schaemic aetiology (e.g. rapid AF, anaemia, sepsis)
• Ischaemic symptoms or eCG changes not necessary for MINS.
