# Chapter 4: At-risk Populations

> 來源頁面: 131-175

---

<!-- Page 131 -->
110
110 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Routine postoperative surveillance
Daily ctnt measurements on d1, 2 and 3 after non-c ardiac surgery, while
the patient is in hospital, in at- risk patients (e.g. age ≥65y or with a history
of atherosclerotic disease).12
Medical management8
• Consider starting low- dose aspirin and statin therapy.
• Consider starting ACe inhibitor if there is hypertension.
• there is some evidence that initiation of anticoagulation (MANAGe
trial) may reduce the risk of major vascular complications.12
• role of coronary angiography and revascularisation is unclear.
• Arrange postoperative follow- up with cardiologist as an outpatient.

<!-- Page 132 -->
HeArt FAILUre 111
Heart failure
Heart failure is the commonest cause of admission to hospital in those
aged >65y. Incidence rises with increasing age, with a 5y mortality of 750%.
Pertinent to the anaesthetist, indices estimating perioperative MACe and
mortality include heart failure as an independent prognostic variable, with
unstable or decompensated heart failure bestowing a greater burden of risk.
Heart failure is a clinical syndrome characterised by typical symptoms
(breathlessness, ankle swelling and fatigue) with or without signs (raised
jugular venous pressure (JVP), pulmonary crackles and peripheral oedema),
caused by structural and/ or functional cardiac abnormality, resulting in a
reduced CO and/ or raised intracardiac pressures at rest or during stress.8
LV systolic and diastolic dysfunction can be asymptomatic precursors
of heart failure.8 terminology has been based on left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVeF), but symptoms may not fit with the degree of reduction in
LVeF. Current terminology used to describe heart failure is as follows: heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFreF), heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction (HFpeF) and heart failure with mid-r ange ejection fraction
(HFmreF) (is treated as per HFpeF) (table 5.4).
Heart failure can be graded by severity of symptoms ± exercise intoler-
ance or structural disease by the New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional classification (table 5.5) or the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association stages of heart failure (table 5.6).
Other classification systems used to describe heart failure include:
• Chronicity: acute, subacute and chronic
• Symptoms: stable and unstable (deterioration from stable symptoms is
referred to as decompensation)
• Affected side(s): left- and/ or right- sided ventricular failure
• Diastolic and/ or systolic dysfunction.
Table 5.4 Criteria required to define HFpeF, HFmreF and HFreF
HFpEF HFmrEF HFrEF
Symptoms ± Yes Yes Yes
signs*
LVEF ≥50% 40– 49% <40%
BNP or elevated elevated
NT- proBNP
At least one LVH/ left atrial LVH/ left atrial
additional enlargement or enlargement or
criterion diastolic dysfunction diastolic dysfunction
BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; LVeF, left ventricular ejection fraction; LVH, left ventricular hyper-
trophy; Nt- proBNP, N- terminal pro- brain natriuretic peptide.
* Signs may not be present in early stages or if treated.

<!-- Page 133 -->
112
112 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Table 5.5 New York Heart Association functional classification
Class
1 Cardiac disease, no symptoms or limitation to ordinary physical activity
2 Mild symptoms and slight limitation during ordinary activity
3 Significant limitations in activity due to symptoms. Comfortable at rest
4 Symptoms at rest. Severe limitations
Source: data from Criteria Committee, New York Heart Association, Inc. Diseases of the Heart
and Blood Vessels. Nomenclature and Criteria for diagnosis, 6th edition Boston, Little, Brown and
Co. 1964, p 114.
Table 5.6 American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association
stages of heart failure
Stage
A At high risk of heart failure, but without symptoms or structural heart
disease
B Structural heart disease, but without signs or symptoms of heart failure
C Structural heart disease, with prior or current symptoms of heart failure
D refractory heart failure requiring specialised interventions
Source: data from Hunt, S.A. et al., Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Heart Failure in Adults, Journal of the American
College of Cardiology, 2009;53(15):e1–e90.
Left ventricular heart failure (LVHF)
A note on terminology: although heart failure terminology has changed
(HFpeF, HFmreF, HFreF), the terms systolic and diastolic left ventricular
dysfunction are still widely used. In essence, systolic dysfunction refers to
HFreF, and diastolic dysfunction to HFpeF. HFmreF is a grey zone in the
middle. Symptoms can be present, independent of the degree of preser-
vation of LVeF.
• Orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea are the most sensitive
symptoms.
• elevated JVP is the most sensitive clinical sign.
Other common symptoms include:
• Presence of peripheral oedema
• Uncontrolled hypertension, tachycardia or arrhythmias
• Limited exercise tolerance and exertional dyspnoea.
echocardiography is the mainstay of LVHF investigation. echocardiographic
changes include:
• d LVeF
• d LV filling pressure, mitral valve inflow velocity
• evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) or left atrial
enlargement.
Given a normal LVeF in HFpeF, symptoms, signs, eCG (AF, LVH) and plasma
natriuretic peptides (BNP) all help with the diagnosis.

<!-- Page 134 -->
HeArt FAILUre 113
Management8, 13
Aims to delay progression of symptoms, optimise symptom management
and functional capacity and reduce mortality. Modifying risk factors (e.g.
hypertension, glycaemic control) may delay disease progression.
Medical treatment of HFrEF
the evidence for best management is clearest for HFreF.
• ACe inhibitors reduce morbidity and mortality. Beneficial effects include
reduction in pre- / afterload and neurohormonal antagonism of the
renin– angiotensin–a ldosterone system. titrate to maximum tolerated
dose. ArBs are recommended in patients intolerant of ACe inihibitors.
• the combination of neprilysin inhibitor with ArB (sacubitril/v alsartan)
reduces cardiovascular mortality by 20% and all-c ause mortality by 16%. the
neprilysin inhibitor increases the bioavailability of natriuretic peptides. this
leads to ventricular unloading and vasodilatory effects. this combination may
be used instead of ACe inhibitor or ArB in refractory cases.
• β- blockers (carvedilol, bisoprolol) reduce Hr and myocardial O
2
demand. β- blockers should be continued throughout the perioperative
period. Use with caution in new- onset or decompensated heart failure.
• Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, e.g. spironolactone, reduce
mortality in symptomatic patients already treated with ACe inhibitors.
Use with caution in patients with impaired renal function. Other
diuretics may be added for symptom control.
• Inotropes: digoxin may be used to control AF with rapid ventricular rate
in symptomatic heart failure or in patients in Sr with severe heart failure.
• Anticoagulation: if in AF or at risk of Vte.
• Calcium channel blockers are not safe for use in HFreF.
Device treatment
• ICDs may be indicated for high-r isk symptomatic patients or after unstable
ventricular arrhythmias. they reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death.
• Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (Crt) for those with prolonged QrS
duration. Biventricular pacing wires are placed. this aims to improve
symptoms and reduce mortality in select patients.
Medical treatment of HFpEF and HFmrEF
No specific treatments have demonstrated a reduction in morbidity or
mortality in these groups.14
• Diuretics are used as the mainstay of symptom management. they
probably reduce morbidity and mortality.
• Spironolactone reduces heart failure hospitalisations.
• β- blockers and ACe inhibitors may be used for BP control.
• Manage AF in accordance with established clinical guidelines.
Right- sided heart failure15
rV dysfunction is an independent predictor of MACe after non-c ardiac
surgery. right heart failure can be broadly divided into three categories,
depending on its causation:
• 2° to pulmonary hypertension
• 2° to pericardial disease
• 2° to ventricular or valvular pathology.
Pulmonary hypertension is most commonly caused by LV failure, but other
causes include chronic lung disease, OSA and Pe.
table 5.7 lists the causes of rV failure.

<!-- Page 135 -->
114
114 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Table 5.7 Causes of right heart failure
d RV contractility RV volume RV pressure overload
overload
Acute Sepsis excessive Acidosis
Myocardial transfusion Hypoxia, IPPV, ArDS
injury/ MI LVHF Pe
Myocarditis LVHF
Chronic rV Pulmonary Pulmonary
cardiomyopathy or tricuspid hypertension
ebstein anomaly regurgitation Pulmonary stenosis
Left- sided valvular
disease
restrictive
cardiomyopathy
ArDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; IPPV, intermittent positive pressure ventilation;
LVHF, left ventricular heart failure; MI, myocardial infarction; Pe, pulmonary embolism.
Signs and symptoms of RHF
• Signs of reduced CO: hypotension, tachycardia, cyanosis
• Peripheral oedema— the commonest clinical sign
• elevated JVP and left parasternal heave
• Ascites and hepatic/ renal dysfunction
• Arrhythmias— common.
Investigations
• eCG may show right axis deviation and rV strain (S deflection in I, Q
deflection in III and inverted t in III).
• Check blood for anaemia and renal and thyroid dysfunction.
• raised BNP and troponin reflect stress and injury. Along with raised
liver enzymes and prolonged international normalised ratio (INr), they
reflect poor prognosis.
• CXr may show signs of causative pathology, e.g. LVHF.
• transthoracic echocardiogram. tricuspid annular plane systolic
excursion (tAPSe) is a measurement of displacement of the lateral
tricuspid annulus towards the apex during systole. It is used as an
assessment of global rV function. tAPSe <16mm indicates rV systolic
dysfunction. Alternatives include transoesophageal echocardiography
(tOe), radionuclide imaging and cardiac MrI.
• Cardiac catheterisation may help if significant coronary or valvular heart
disease is suspected. right heart catheterisation provides an accurate
assessment of pulmonary hypertension.
Medical management
treat the underling condition (e.g. myocarditis, LVHF, Pe) and aim to opti-
mise rV preload, afterload and contractility.
• Diuretics usually require high doses. Do not discontinue in a
hypotensive patient if there is evidence of volume overload. renal
replacement therapy may be required.
• Correct physiological causes of raised pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVr) (e.g. hypoxia, hypercapnia, acidosis).

<!-- Page 136 -->
HeArt FAILUre 115
• reduce PVr with non- selective vasodilators (e.g. GtN or sodium
nitroprusside) or selective pulmonary vasodilators (e.g. prostacyclins,
nitric oxide, phosphodiesterase (PDe)-5 inhibitors). Pulmonary
vasodilators improve exercise tolerance and MACe in patients with right
heart failure 2° to pulmonary hypertension.
• Consider dobutamine or milrinone, which have combined inotropic and
vasodilator properties. Vasopressors may also be required.
• In chronic right heart failure, consider sodium restriction.
• Patients with biventricular dysfunction should be managed according to
current guidelines for LVHF.
Perioperative management
Some patients may be deemed unfit for the proposed surgery. Consideration
of individual patient and surgical risk is required. Multidisciplinary discussion
will direct best patient care.
• History and examination should identify present or recent episodes of
decompensated heart failure.
• Continue medical management in the preoperative period. If
concerned, consult a cardiologist to see if changes in therapy are
needed to minimise symptoms of ventricular dysfunction.
• tachy- and bradyarrhythmias may occur. Consider direct current
cardioversion (DCCV) in haemodynamically unstable patients. Correct
electrolyte abnormalities. For chronic arrhythmias, aim for Hr 780bpm.
Use local or regional techniques for peripheral procedures.
• ensure adequate ventilation to maintain oxygenation and normocapnia.
Careful use of positive end- expiratory pressure (PeeP) will reduce PVr
in patients with pre- existing rV dysfunction.
• Invasive cardiovascular monitoring (arterial line, CVC, tOe) should be
considered for all major surgery and high- risk patients.
• Perioperative decompensation may require treatment with vasodilator
and inotropic therapy.
• Careful monitoring of fluid balance is essential.
• All patients should have supplemental O following surgery.
2
• Good postoperative analgesia is essential to minimise detrimental
effects of catecholamine release in response to pain.
• Consider ICU/ HDU.

<!-- Page 137 -->
116
116 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Hypertension
About 25% of the adult UK population has hypertension, defined as sys-
tolic blood pressure (BP) >140mmHg and diastolic BP >90mmHg (stage
1 hypertension). triggers for consideration for treatment in 1° care are
≥160/1 00mmHg or average ambulatory BP ≥150/ 95mmHg (stage 2
hypertension).16 the link between elevated arterial pressure and CVS dis-
ease is well established, with the greatest risk associated with the highest
arterial pressures.
evidence that moderate hypertension is associated with i perioperative
risk is limited, although CVS lability may be i. In adults undergoing non-
cardiac surgery, maintaining systolic arterial pressure >100mmHg and mean
arterial pressure (MAP) >60– 70mmHg may reduce the risk of periopera-
tive myocardial injury, AKI and death. the degree of injury is dependent on
the severity and duration of hypotension. the association of hypertension
with end- organ damage (IHD, heart failure, renal failure) contributes to the
likelihood of perioperative CVS complications.
Perioperative management17
Ambulatory NIBP measurement is the optimal method to establish baseline
values. Preoperative readings are unlikely to be an accurate representation
of long- term BP control.
• 1° (essential) hypertension accounts for 95% of all cases, but consider
the possibility of 2° hypertension (e.g. renal parenchymal disease,
thyroid dysfunction, hyperaldosteronism, phaeochromocytoma). 2°
hypertension is more likely with early- onset or malignant/ accelerated
hypertension and has specific anaesthetic implications.
• Do not defer surgery on the basis of a single BP reading on admission
to hospital. refer to ambulatory BP reading or contact GP for a more
accurate baseline record.
• Preoperative BP targets are unclear for those on antihypertensives, but
both preoperative hypotension and hypertension are associated with an
increase in perioperative risk.
• there is insufficient evidence to support the introduction of
hypertensive medical management in the immediate preoperative
period to reduce perioperative risk.
• there is currently no upper limit of MAP that necessitates medical
management. Current evidence is contradictory, but expert opinion
recommends postponement of elective surgery in patients with arterial
pressure exceeding 180mmHg systolic and/ or 110mmHg diastolic.
• the presence of end-o rgan dysfunction (including coronary or
cerebrovascular disease, impairment of renal function, signs of LVH and
heart failure) increases perioperative risk. these conditions may require
further investigation and/ or treatment, in addition to the control of
elevated arterial BP.
• Withhold ACe inhibitor/ ArB 24h prior to surgery to reduce the risk of
intraoperative cardiovascular instability (use caution in heart failure).
• Continue β- blockers, calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics in
the perioperative period.

<!-- Page 138 -->
HYPerteNSION 117
• Intraoperative BP targets may be described as absolute thresholds
(i.e. MAP >65mmHg) or relative thresholds (within 20% of baseline).
Absolute thresholds are usually easier to target, especially given the
uncertainty of accuracy of preoperative BP values.
• Patient- specific BP targets should be set based on patient and surgical
factors. Certain surgeries (e.g. intracranial and carotid endarterectomy
(CeA)) will require a narrower BP range to minimise postoperative
complications.
• Postoperatively18 maintain systolic arterial BP >90mmHg. Postoperative
BP below this value is associated with i risk of MINS, CVe and death.
risk is i by prolonged periods of hypotension. Injury may occur at
higher values in patients with pre- existing hypertension.
• Postoperative hypertension is associated with i risk of MINS, CVe,
arrhythmias, heart failure and surgical site bleeding.

<!-- Page 139 -->
118
118 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Valvular heart disease
Valvular heart disease is found in 4% of patients over the age of 65y. Patients
with a known valve problem may already be under the care of a cardiolo-
gist. Valvular lesions most commonly occur in isolation, but multivalvular
disease (most commonly degenerative in nature) occurs in 710– 20% (de-
fined by moderate dysfunction in at least two cardiac valves).
In each case:
• Assess the significance of the pathology for the proposed surgery
• Assess for presence and progression of symptoms
• In the absence of a recent echocardiogram within 1y, or a significant
change in clinical status, obtain an echocardiogram to provide an
objective assessment of form and function. In the non-e lective
setting, point- of- care ultrasound may be useful to guide perioperative
management
• In a minority of cases, treatment of the valvular pathology is more
urgent than the surgery itself.
The patient with an undiagnosed murmur
Most heart murmurs do not signify cardiac disease. Many are related to
physiological increases in blood flow. Assess the functional capacity (DASI;
see % p. 35) and for the presence or absence of symptoms. Many asymp-
tomatic children and young adults with a murmur can safely undergo an-
aesthesia and surgery if they have a good functional capacity and are
asymptomatic.
elderly patients may have an asymptomatic ‘aortic’ systolic murmur re-
lated to sclerotic aortic valve leaflets. Aortic sclerosis is now considered to
be an early form of aortic stenosis (AS) (715% of patients with aortic scler-
osis will develop AS within 7y) but should not cause clinical problems until
progression to AV obstruction occurs.
Factors that differentiate early asymptomatic sclerosis from stenosis
include:
• Good exercise tolerance (>4 Mets)
• No history of exertional symptoms (angina/ breathlessness/ syncope)
• Absence of slow- rising pulse (normal pulse pressure)
• Absence of LVH/ LV strain pattern on eCG.
the auditory volume of the murmur does not help.
take a full history and examine the eCG and CXr. Patients able to
manage 4 Mets, with a normal eCG and CXr, should tolerate minor and
intermediate surgery but should have an echocardiogram prior to major
surgery. Conversely, poor functional capacity or an abnormal eCG (such as
LVH or a prior MI) should be investigated by echocardiography. For urgent
or emergent surgery, point- of- care ultrasound enables objective assess-
ment of cardiac valves, ventricular function and intravascular status.

<!-- Page 140 -->
VALVULAr HeArt DISeASe 119
Prosthetic valves
• Bioprosthetic (tissue) valves do not require long-t erm anticoagulation
due to low risk of thrombosis and thromboembolism.
• Mechanical valves require lifelong anticoagulation with warfarin (target
INr 2– 3.5, depending on type of valve).
• Direct oral anticoagulants are not currently recommended for
mechanical prosthetic valves.19
• Aspirin is recommended, in addition to warfarin, if low risk of bleeding.
• Anticoagulation may need to be withheld, depending on the type of
surgery (warfarin usually stopped for 5d preoperatively).
• Bridging with LMWH (or UFH if renal failure) may be required.
• requirement for bridging therapy is dependent on risk of
thromboembolism (e.g. mechanical mitral valve, older mechanical AV,
history of thromboembolism, presence of AF).
• Newer-g eneration bileaflet mechanical AV has <4% per annum risk
of thromboembolism, so bridging is not required in the absence of
additional patient- specific risks for thromboembolism.
• Consult local policies on bridging regimes.20

<!-- Page 141 -->
210
120 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Aortic stenosis
AS is the commonest valvulopathy in europe and North America. the
prevalence increases exponentially with age and 2% of the general popu-
lation have a congenital bicuspid valve, a risk factor for AS. the annual
mortality rate in patients with symptomatic severe AS is 25%.21 the risk of
perioperative MACe is high due to anaesthetic and surgical stresses.
AS is commonly due to AV calcification. Degenerative AV sclerosis is an
antecedent to clinically significant AS. Progressive valve narrowing increases
afterload, leading to concentric LVH and reduced diastolic compliance.
elevated filling pressures and Sr are required to fill the non- compliant LV.
Normal LVeDP may reflect hypovolaemia.
Atrial contractions contribute up to 40% to the left ventricular end-
diastolic volume (LVeDV) in AS (normally only 20– 30%). Arrhythmias will
reduce CO. there is a high risk of myocardial ischaemia due to O supply–
2
demand mismatch. Increasing LV mass increases O demand. resultant
2
increases in systolic wall tension and intraventricular cavity pressure com-
press subendocardial vessels during systole, making the subendocardium
vulnerable to ischaemia.
even with normal coronary vessels, 30% of patients with AS experience
angina. tachycardia (stress, pain) further increases O demand and shortens
2
diastole, increasing compromise of coronary perfusion and increasing is-
chaemia. Diastolic BP is crucial to maintain coronary perfusion.
History and examination
Symptoms do not correlate well with the severity of stenosis, but exertional
angina, dyspnoea and pre-/ syncope may be present. On examination, there
may be a slow-r ising pulse with narrow pulse pressure. An ejection systolic
murmur is typically maximal at the 2nd intercostal space, right sternal edge,
and radiates to the neck.
Investigations
• eCG: LVH and strain (with 2° St– t wave abnormalities).
• CXr: post-s tenotic dilation of the aorta, calcified aortic annulus and
signs of LV heart failure.
• echocardiography: assesses AS severity (table 5.8) and LV function.
• Cardiac catheterisation allows measurement of AV gradient.
Table 5.8 Aortic stenosis severity grading
Peak velocity (m/ s) Mean gradient Valve area (cm2)
(mmHg)
Sclerosis <2.5 Normal Normal
Mild 2.5– 3 <20 >1.5
Moderate 3– 4 20– 40 1– 1.5
Severe >4 40 <1

<!-- Page 142 -->
AOrtIC SteNOSIS 121
Perioperative management1,3,21
Risk
• Guidelines prioritise the presence and progression of symptoms in
decision- making for elective non- cardiac surgery.
• Irrespective of symptoms, a large meta- analysis demonstrated higher
rates of MACe, but not mortality, in patients with AS undergoing non-
cardiac surgery. Patients with AS and CAD probably represent a higher-
risk population.
• With appropriate haemodynamic monitoring, it is reasonable
for asymptomatic patients with severe AS to undergo elective,
intermediate- risk non- cardiac surgery.
• Symptomatic patients with severe AS may be considered for valvular
intervention prior to elective surgery.
Haemodynamic goals
• Low- normal Hr
• Maintain Sr
• Adequate preload
• Maintain systemic vascular resistance (SVr) and avoid hypotension.
Perioperative
• Patients with severe AS have a fixed CO. they cannot compensate for
a reduced SVr, resulting in hypotension, myocardial ischaemia and a
downward spiral of reduced contractility.
• Balance myocardial O supply– demand by maintaining afterload and
2
avoiding tachycardia (‘slow and tight’).
• An arterial line is extremely useful—p lace prior to induction.
• titrate drugs carefully and treat hypotension promptly and aggressively.
Insertion of a CVC allows reliable administration of vasoconstrictor
therapy. Intraoperative tOe may be useful.
• Arrhythmias must be treated promptly, or haemodynamic collapse may
ensue. Consider the role of DCCV.
• effective analgesia avoids catecholamine-i nduced tachycardia and
hypertension. Central neuraxial blocks (CNBs) must be used with
caution due to significant reduction in afterload. regional blocks can be
used alone or in conjunction with GA.
• Have a low threshold for admission to ICU/ HDU for observation and
possible need for vasopressors.

<!-- Page 143 -->
212
122 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Aortic regurgitation
Aortic regurgitant lesions are better tolerated than stenotic lesions.
Asymptomatic patients with normal LVeF have a favourable prognosis.
Pathophysiology
Aortic regurgitation (Ar) results from diseases involving the aortic leaflets
themselves, or aortic root/ annulus incompetence.
• Aortic leaflet: degenerative disease, Ie, rheumatic heart disease,
connective tissue disease, bicuspid valve
• Aortic root/ annulus: Marfan’s syndrome, connective tissue disease,
aortic dissection.
Acute AR (e.g. endocarditis or acute type A aortic dissection)
With a large regurgitant volume, the LV becomes overwhelmed acutely. LV
diastolic pressure rises, approaching aortic diastolic pressure. Untreated,
mitral regurgitation (Mr) follows, leading to pulmonary oedema and circu-
latory failure. treatment is emergency valve surgery.
Chronic AR
the return of blood back to the ventricle during diastole contributes to
preload. i LVeDV produces a compensatory increase in force of contrac-
tion and stroke volume. Aortic systolic pressure rises, but aortic diastolic
pressure is reduced due to regurgitation.
• eccentric LVH followed by LV dilation prevents significant increases in
LV filling pressures despite large regurgitant volume. Progressive LV
dilation increases wall stress. Initially, LVeF is maintained, followed by
dilation. LV dysfunction may be masked by raised preload.
• Decompensation can be caused by further increase in LV wall stress,
leading to d diastolic compliance and LV systolic dysfunction. Heart
failure symptoms ensue.
History, examination and investigations
Most of the symptoms are 2° to heart failure in decompensated Ar, but
patients may experience palpitations or angina due to reduced coronary
perfusion pressure in the setting of i LV wall stress.
• On examination, a collapsing (‘waterhammer’) pulse illustrates a wide
pulse pressure resulting in: visible neck pulsation (Corrigan’s sign),
head nodding (de Musset’s sign) or visible capillary pulsations in the
nail beds (Quincke’s sign). A diastolic murmur may be heard at the 2nd
intercostal space, right sternal edge.
• CXr: cardiomegaly, boot- shaped heart.
• eCG: non-s pecific LVH.
• echocardiogram provides quantitative analysis of the aortic leaflets and
aortic root. Doppler studies allow estimation of regurgitant severity. LV
size and function are assessed.

<!-- Page 144 -->
AOrtIC reGUrGItAtION 123
Perioperative risk1
• Ar increases cardiac risk during non- cardiac surgery, especially if LV
function is reduced.
• In asymptomatic patients with severe Ar, elective intermediate-r isk
non- cardiac surgery is reasonable with appropriate perioperative
haemodynamic monitoring.
• Patients with poor functional capacity should be considered for valve
replacement surgery prior to elective surgery.
Haemodynamic goals
• High- normal Hr (790bpm)
• Adequate preload
• Low SVr
• Maintain Sr
• Maintain contractility.
the selected anaesthetic technique aims to promote forward systemic flow.
Maintaining a faster Hr reduces diastolic regurgitation time. A reduction in
SVr to the low-n ormal range decreases afterload while maintaining cor-
onary perfusion pressure (‘full, fast and forward’).
• Spinal and epidural anaesthesia is well tolerated.
• Intra- arterial pressure monitoring is useful for major surgery and/o r
high- risk symptomatic patients. Non-i nvasive CO monitoring is
inaccurate. tOe, if available, may guide optimisation of LV function.
• treat perioperative supraventricular tachycardia (SVt)/A F promptly
with synchronised DCCV (see % p. 149), particularly if associated with
hypotension. Persistent bradycardia may need to be treated with β-
agonist or anticholinergic agents.

<!-- Page 145 -->
214
124 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Mitral stenosis
rheumatic fever is the commonest cause. A minority have isolated stenosis;
the majority have mixed mitral valve disease (stenosis and regurgitation).
• Mitral valve stenosis (MS) causes underfilling of the LV and increasing
pressure and volume upstream of the valve (table 5.9). the LV
functions normally but is small and poorly filled.
• Pulmonary vascular pressures are initially maintained by left atrial
dilation. As disease progresses, the pulmonary artery pressure
(PAP) increases. reactive pulmonary vasoconstriction contributes to
development of pulmonary hypertension.
• Adaptive rV hypertrophy fails to compensate for volume and pressure
overload, leading to progressive rV dilation and failure.
• the pressure gradient across the narrow mitral orifice increases with
the square of the CO. rapid Hrs, especially with AF, decrease the
diastolic filling time and markedly decrease the CO.
• Chronic left atrial dilation greatly increases the risk of AF.
• Intracardiac thrombus, either in the left atrium or left atrial appendage,
may develop due to low- velocity blood flow. If present, anticoagulation
is required.
• Critical MS is a fixed, low CO state.
Table 5.9 Valve area in mitral stenosis
Normal valve surface area 4– 6cm2
Symptom- free until 1.6– 2.5cm2
Moderate stenosis 1– 1.5cm2
Severe stenosis <1.0cm2
History
Patients complain of dyspnoea, haemoptysis and recurrent bronchitis.
Fatigue and palpitations are common.
Examination
• Mitral facies: malar flush on cheeks
• Peripheral cyanosis
• Signs of right heart failure
• tapping apex beat. Loud 1st heart sound, opening snap (if in Sr) and
low- pitched diastolic murmur heard best at the apex (with the bell of
the stethoscope).

<!-- Page 146 -->
MItrAL SteNOSIS 125
Investigations
• eCG: P mitrale (left atrial enlargement) if Sr. AF common
• CXr: valve calcification. Large left atrium (lateral film). Double shadow
behind the heart on posterior- to- anterior (PA) film. Splaying of the
carina. Kerley B lines indicating pulmonary congestion
• echocardiogram measures the gradient and valve area (table 5.9).
Allows assessments of rV function. Assesses for presence of
intracardiac thrombus.
Perioperative risk1
Patients with MS who meet standard criteria should undergo valvular
intervention prior to elective surgery (open or percutaneous mitral
commissurotomy).
• In asymptomatic patients with severe MS, elective intermediate-r isk
non- cardiac surgery is reasonable with appropriate perioperative
hsemodynamic monitoring.
Haemodynamic goals
• Low- normal Hr 50– 70bpm
• Maintain Sr. Cardiovert if AF occurs perioperatively
• Adequate preload
• High- normal SVr
• Avoid hypercapnia, acidosis and hypoxia, which may exacerbate
pulmonary hypertension.
Anaesthetic goals aim to maintain the delicate balance of adequate LV filling,
while minimising decompensation of chronically i pulmonary pressures.
• tachycardia should be avoided, as i Hr reduces time for LV filling.
Short- acting β- blockers may be used for Hr control.
• Maintain an adequate afterload. However, fluid overload may precipitate
acute pulmonary oedema. Measurement of CVP and pulmonary
capillary occlusion pressure and tOe, if available, will guide intravascular
volume management and ventricular function.
• Inotropic support may be required to optimise rV function.
• Spinal and epidural anaesthesia may be hazardous.

<!-- Page 147 -->
216
126 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Mitral regurgitation
Mitral regurgitant lesions are better tolerated than stenotic lesions.
Asymptomatic patients with normal LVeF have a favourable prognosis. Mr
results from leaflet, chordal or papillary muscle abnormalities or as a conse-
quence of LV dysfunction (functional Mr).
• Leaflet: complication of endocarditis, rheumatic disease or mitral valve
prolapse, myxomatous degeneration
• Chordal: chordae rupture after AMI or after bacterial endocarditis
• Papillary muscle: ischaemic posterior papillary muscle dysfunction
• LV failure leads to dilation of mitral valve annulus.
the left atrium is subjected to volume and pressure overload—a daptive
dilation occurs gradually. As much as 50% of the LV volume flows into the
dilated left atrium before the aortic valve opens. LVeF is i and over time,
LV dysfunction may occur. the degree of regurgitation is determined by
the afterload, size of the regurgitant orifice and Hr. A moderately i Hr
(>90bpm) decreases the time for regurgitation in systole and decreases the
time for diastolic filling, reducing LV overload. Chronic Mr will lead to pul-
monary vascular congestion, followed by pulmonary hypertension and right
heart failure.
History, examination and investigations
• Fatigue, dyspnoea, palpitations, symptoms of right heart failure. Acutely,
Mr may present with flash pulmonary oedema
• Displaced and forceful apex due to LVH, soft S, apical pansystolic
1
murmur radiating to the axilla and loud S
3
• eCG: left atrial enlargement. AF is common
• CXr: left atrial and LV enlargement. Mitral annular calcification
• echocardiogram gives quantitative estimate of regurgitant fraction,
including measuring the vena contracta (narrowest cross-s ectional area
of a fluid jet) which corresponds to the regurgitant orifice area and Mr
severity. Assess ventricular function. tOe particularly useful as the left
atrium is adjacent to the oesophagus.
Mitral valve prolapse
• Common (incidental finding in 5% of population)
• Usually asymptomatic, but may be associated with atypical chest pain,
palpitations, syncope and emboli
• Mid- systolic click and late diastolic murmur
• echocardiogram shows enlarged redundant mitral valve leaflets
prolapsing into the left atrium during mid- to late systole, causing
arrhythmias and regurgitation
• Antiarrhythmics must be continued perioperatively.
Perioperative risk1
Mr increases cardiac risk during non- cardiac surgery, especially if LV func-
tion is reduced.
• In asymptomatic patients with severe Mr, elective intermediate-r isk
non- cardiac surgery is reasonable with appropriate perioperative
haemodynamic monitoring.
• Patients with poor functional capacity should be considered for valve
repair/ replacement surgery prior to elective surgery.

<!-- Page 148 -->
MItrAL reGUrGItAtION 127
Haemodynamic goals
• High- normal Hr (790bpm).
• Adequate preload.
• Low SVr.
• Low PVr.
• Maintain Sr.
Anaesthetic goals aim to promote forward systemic flow. Maintaining a
faster Hr reduces systolic regurgitation time. Bradycardia will increase LV
diastolic filling, leading to LV distension.
• A reduction in SVr to the low- normal range decreases afterload while
maintaining coronary perfusion pressure. Spinal and epidural anaesthesia
is well tolerated.
• Intra- arterial pressure monitoring is useful for major surgery and/o r
high- risk symptomatic patients.
• Preload can be difficult to estimate; for major non-c ardiac surgery, a
pulmonary artery (PA) catheter and/ or tOe, if available, may be useful
to guide intravascular volume management.
• In advanced disease, pulmonary hypertension is common. Avoid factors
that increase the PAP (hypoxia, hypercapnia, high inspiratory pressures,
acidosis).
• Inotropic support may be required to optimise ventricular function.

<!-- Page 149 -->
218
128 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Pericardial disease
Acute pericarditis
• Inflammatory disease of the pericardium.
• May be idiopathic, infective, non- infective (e.g. post- cardiac surgery)
or autoimmune. Usually presents with chest pain. the diagnosis is
supported by widespread saddle- shaped St- elevation on eCG.
• Frequently occurs with myocarditis, which may increase the likelihood
of arrhythmia and sudden death.
• elective surgery should be postponed for at least 6w.
Constrictive pericarditis
• Chronic inflammation of the pericardium causes thickening and reduced
compliance.
• Common causes include post- infective and autoimmune diseases (e.g.
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLe). the only effective treatment is
pericardiectomy which may be dramatically effective.
• Pulsus paradoxus (exaggerated fall in systolic BP with inspiration) may
be seen due to the thickened pericardium preserving intrapericardial
pressure. the normal maximum fall is 10mmHg.
• Systolic function of the myocardium is well maintained, but diastolic
function is severely impaired. When exercise tolerance is reduced, GA
carries a significant risk.
• Bradycardia and reduced cardiac filling are poorly tolerated.
• elevations in intrathoracic pressure, such as during intermittent positive
pressure ventilation (IPPV), can result in profound hypotension.
• If anaesthesia is unavoidable, and regional block is not possible, then a
spontaneously breathing technique is preferable to IPPV. Preload should
be maintained, and tachycardia avoided.
Pericardial effusion
• excessive fluid accumulation within the pericardial space.
• effusion may be transudate, exudate, haemorrhagic or purulent,
depending on the aetiology.
• Progressive accumulation may lead to compression of cardiac chambers
and tamponade.
• Non- specific symptoms include dyspnoea, orthopnoea, chest pain and
tachycardia.
• Clinical signs of tamponade include Beck’s triad: raised JVP, hypotension
and muffled heart sounds.
• echocardiography is a useful diagnostic tool.
• Urgent pericardiocentesis or a pericardial window may be required.
• elective surgery should be postponed for at least 6w.

<!-- Page 150 -->
CArDIOMYOPAtHY 129
Cardiomyopathy
‘A heterogenous group diseases of the myocardium associated with mech-
anical and/o r electrical dysfunction which usually exhibit inappropriate ven-
tricular hypertrophy or dilation.22
Cardiomyopathies are either confined to the heart (1°) (table 5.10) or
a manifestation of a systemic disease (2°), e.g. amyloidosis, haemochroma-
tosis, sarcoidosis or thyroid disease.22 regardless of the aetiology, there is a
potential final common pathway of myocardial injury, leading to ventricular
dysfunction and clinical heart failure. Often, no disease- specific treatment is
available. Management focuses on heart failure therapy.
there is little evidence on perioperative risk evaluation in patients
with non- ischaemic cardiomyopathy undergoing non-c ardiac surgery.1,23
Markers of disease severity include poor functional capacity and reduced
LVeF. Other factors associated with poor prognosis include resting tachy-
cardia, low BP, interventricular conduction abnormalities and LV diastolic
dysfunction.
Table 5.10 Causes of primary cardiomyopathy
Genetic Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, haemochromatosis, arrhythmogenic
rV dysplasia, dilated cardiomyopathy variants, Fabry’s disease
Acquired tachycardia- induced, stress- induced, drug- related
Mixed Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, restrictive
Stress- induced cardiomyopathy
• Also known as takotsubo and apical ballooning syndrome.
• reversible cardiomyopathy characterised by transient systolic
dysfunction indistinguishable from AMI, but in the absence of CAD.
• responsible for 72% of all acute coronary syndrome events.
• Differing mechanisms have been suggested, but possibly due to
catecholamine release.
• Commonly precipitated by sudden, emotionally (occasionally
physiologically) stressful events.
• Commonest in women aged 58– 75y (90%).
• rWMAs are beyond single vascular territory.
• Patients are often critically ill acutely: congestive cardiac failure
(CCF), arrhythmias, cardiogenic shock, left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction.
• Mortality is in the region of 1%.
• Symptoms resolve quickly; about 10% may reoccur.
• treatment is supportive.

<!-- Page 151 -->
310
130 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
• rare condition. the commonest cause is myocardial infiltration by
amyloid.
• Characterised by stiff ventricles that impair ventricular filling. right heart
failure is often prominent. echo shows diastolic dysfunction.
• Anaesthesia is potentially associated with high risk.
• Peripheral vasodilation, myocardial depression and reduced venous
return may cause catastrophic cardiovascular decompensation and may
precipitate cardiac arrest.
• Venous return may be further compromised by positive pressure
ventilation. Wherever possible, maintain spontaneous respiration.
• Ketamine may be useful, as it increases myocardial contractility and
peripheral resistance.
• Fluids should be given to maintain elevated right heart pressures.
Haemodynamic goals
• Maintain Sr
• Adequate volume loading
• High- normal SVr
• Avoid myocardial depression.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
this manifests as cardiac failure with impaired systolic function and dilation
of both ventricles, predominantly the LV. Functional mitral and tricuspid
incompetence occurs commonly, due to dilation of the valve annulus,
exacerbating heart failure.
• the commonest problems are heart failure, arrhythmias and embolic
phenomena.
• Heart failure is treated according to established guidelines (see %
pp. 111–15). Medical management includes ACe inhibitors, β-
blockers and mineralocorticoid antagonists. Patients are frequently
anticoagulated. Synchronised biventricular pacing may be used. Some
patients may require an ICD for prevention of sudden cardiac death
(see % pp. 830–1 and p. 161).
• Peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs) minimise sympathetic activation. CNB
reduces afterload. Associated hypotension must be avoided.
• Invasive monitoring with arterial and central venous catheters should be
used. Intraoperative tOe, where available, will guide fluid management
and ventricular support.
• Inotropic support may be provided with a variety of β- agonists and
inodilators.
Haemodynamic goals
• Maintain Sr. Avoid tachycardia.
• Adequate volume preload.
• Normal SVr. Avoid increases in afterload.
• Avoid myocardial depression; inotropic support is frequently required
with dobutamine or PDe inhibitors.

<!-- Page 152 -->
CArDIOMYOPAtHY 131
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy is predominantly an
autosomal dominant genetic disorder in 760% of cases. Symptoms
similar to AS. Sudden death is common.
• Accounts for two- thirds of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
patients. Hypertrophy can occur in any part of the ventricle, but the
interventricular septum is commonest.
• Causes dynamic obstruction of the LV outflow during systole.
• Main feature is asymmetric hypertrophy of the interventricular septum,
which obstructs the LV outflow tract during systole.
• Ventricular systole is associated with movement of the anterior
mitral valve leaflet towards the septum (systolic anterior motion),
causing further obstruction of the outflow tract. In some patients, this
causes Mr.
• As with AS, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy results in
pressure overload of the LV. Diastolic dysfunction is evident on
echocardiography.
• Patients are prone to arrhythmias which are refractory to medical
treatment. Insertion of an ICD may be warranted for 1° prevention of
sudden cardiac death.
• Symptom management includes β- blockers or verapamil, due to their
negative inotropic and rate- controlling properties.
• eCG shows evidence of LVH.
• echocardiography or cardiac MrI estimate the degree of functional
obstruction, asymmetric LVH and systolic anterior motion of the
mitral valve.
• Sr is crucial to maintaining ventricular filling. Invasive haemodynamic
monitoring is indicated. Where available, tOe is a useful guide for
intravascular volume management.
• Inotropes are contraindicated as LV obstruction is exacerbated by i
myocardial contractility.
Haemodynamic goals
Maintain a ‘large ventricle’, since dynamic obstruction is reduced.
• Low- normal Hr
• Maintain Sr
• Adequate volume loading
• High- normal SVr
• Low ventricular contractility.

<!-- Page 153 -->
312
132 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Patients with a transplanted heart
Heart transplantation is increasing in frequency, and patients may present
to a non- specialist centre for non-c ardiac surgery. Anaesthesia requires at-
tention to:
• Altered physiology
• effects of immunosuppression
• Medications
• Associated risk factors.
Altered physiology
• the heart is denervated; resting Hr is usually around 90–1 10bpm due
to the absence of vagal tone.
• Intrinsic properties and autoregulatory functions are maintained:21
normal Frank– Starling pressure– volume relationship, intact
adrenoreceptors and normal impulse generation and conduction.
• the heart is preload-d ependent. Compensation for hypovolaemia
and hypotension is delayed due to denervation. An increase in
catecholamines will result in an increase in chronotropy and inotropy,
but this may take 5– 6min.
• reinnervation is an area of ongoing controversy. Some studies have
demonstrated partial, and rarely complete, reinnervation.
• Pharmacodynamic effects are affected by denervation.21 Direct- acting
agents should be used— atropine has no effect on the denervated heart;
the effect of ephedrine is reduced and unpredictable, and hydralazine
and phenylephrine produce no reflex tachy- or bradycardia in response
to their 1° action. Adrenaline, noradrenaline, isoprenaline and β- and
α- blockers act as expected. Due to the potential for reinnervation,
reversal of NMB with neostigmine should be performed with caution.
• Some patients may have experienced temporary bradyarrhythmias after
transplantation. A pacemaker may be in situ.
• Contractility of the heart is close to normal, unless rejection is
developing. In the absence of sympathetic innervation, the age-
predicted maximal Hr is reduced.
Immunosuppression
three classes of drugs are used:
• Calcineurin inhibitors (ciclosporin, tacrolimus) prevent cytokine-
mediated t- cell activation and proliferation.
• Nucleic acid synthesis inhibitors (azathioprine) block lymphocyte
proliferation.
• Steroids block the production of inflammatory cytokines, lyse t-
lymphocytes and alter the function of the remaining lymphocytes.
Effects of treatment
• Anaemia and thrombocytopenia, as well as leucopenia, may result,
requiring treatment before surgery.24
• Ciclosporin is associated with renal dysfunction and is the most likely
cause of the hypertension that affects 40% of heart–l ung transplant
recipients. It may also prolong the action of non- depolarising muscle
relaxants (NDMrs).

<!-- Page 154 -->
PAtIeNtS WItH A trANSPLANteD HeArt 133
• Calcium antagonists increase ciclosporin levels variably and are used in
some centres to reduce the ciclosporin dose in an attempt to reduce
side effects. the effect on blood concentrations must be remembered if
calcium antagonists are omitted for any reason perioperatively.
• renal dysfunction is also commonly caused by tacrolimus.
• Steroid supplementation may be required if large doses of prednisolone
are being used.
Associated risk factors
• Previous, and often repeated, use of central and peripheral vessels can
make IV and arterial access difficult.
• Cough may be impaired due to a combination of phrenic and recurrent
laryngeal nerve palsies. this increases the risks of sputum retention and
postoperative chest infection.
• Heart– lung recipients will have a tracheal anastomosis. It is desirable to
avoid unnecessary intubation, but if it is necessary, use a short tube and
carefully monitor the tracheal cuff pressure. Disrupted lung lymphatic
drainage increases the risk of pulmonary oedema.21
• the transplanted heart may still develop CAD.
Choice of technique
there is no evidence to support one anaesthetic technique above another.
• Peripheral surgery under regional block is likely to be well tolerated.
• Subarachnoid or epidural block may result in marked falls in BP because
of absent cardiac innervation.
• Strict asepsis must be used with all invasive procedures.

<!-- Page 155 -->
314
134 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Congenital heart disease and non-c ardiac
surgery
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is common (1 in 150 births), with >85%
of affected children reaching adult life. Although many will have undergone
corrective surgery, residual problems may be present. there is a higher
incidence of adverse perioperative events in CHD patients undergoing non-
cardiac surgery, although risk varies markedly across the cohort.
General considerations
Procedures for CHD aim to improve the patient’s haemodynamic status,
although complete normalisation is not always achieved. they may broadly
be divided as follows:
• Corrective procedures: the lesion is completely repaired, with no long-
term sequelae (e.g. PDA and ASD closure). In some cases, a residual
defect may be present (e.g. free pulmonary regurgitation after tetralogy
of Fallot repair (toF); see also % p. 137), requiring repeat interventions
and/ or reducing life expectancy.
• Palliative procedures: these patients may have abnormal circulations
and physiology but avoid the consequences of untreated CHD. Life
expectancy is not normal, but many survive to adulthood (e.g. Fontan
procedures; see also % p. 137).
Preoperative assessment
Aim to understand the patient’s cardiac anatomy and pathophysiology, with
a view to risk stratification and perioperative planning.
• History: define the severity of the lesion in terms of impact on normal
activities and growth. Consider relevant comorbidity (e.g. CHArGe
syndrome). Check current medication and obtain a recent cardiology
review.
• examination: check for cyanosis and signs of infection/f ailure. Consider
neurological examination for cyanotic patients.
• Investigations: CXr/ eCG/ echocardiogram. review cardiac catheter
data if available. Baseline peripheral O saturation (SpO) in air. Lab
2 2
tests depend on the proposed surgery, but most will require FBC and
electrolytes.
• Consider: whether surgery should proceed, in view of the risks vs
potential benefit, if the patient can or should be moved to a cardiac
centre and if postoperative ICU/ HDU will be required.
• Anticipate the likely impact of anaesthetic interventions (e.g. the effect
of high fractional inspired oxygen content (FiO) on PVr, anaesthetic
2
drugs on myocardial function and SVr, positive pressure ventilation on
systemic venous return).
Factors suggestive of increased perioperative risk
• Pulmonary hypertension, particularly if rV pressures are systemic
or near- systemic; any further rise in PVr can cause acute rV
decompensation and cardiac arrest. In this context, the presence
of an ASD or VSD can be protective; in the event of a pulmonary
hypertension crisis, a source of right- to- left shunt may allow CO to be
maintained (albeit at the expense of oxygenation).
• Severe ventricular outflow obstruction (e.g. Williams syndrome).

<!-- Page 156 -->
CONGeNItAL HeArt DISeASe AND NON-CArDIAC SUr GerY 135
• ‘Duct- dependent’ or single ventricle physiology.
• Cardiomyopathy (e.g. HCM).
• Severe hypoxaemia (e.g. SpO <75% on air) or polycythaemia (e.g.
2
haematocrit (Hct) >60%).
• Severe or worsening CCF or evidence of myocardial ischaemia.
• Other markers of haemodynamic insufficiency: syncope, arrhythmias or
recent CVe.
Specific considerations
• Cyanosis results from shunting of blood from the right to the left side
of the heart through a focal defect (e.g. toF) or complete intracardiac
mixing (e.g. single ventricle lesions, complete atrioventricular
septal defect (AVSD)). Adaptations to chronic hypoxaemia include
polycythaemia and i blood volume. Blood viscosity is i, impairing tissue
perfusion. thrombosis (e.g. cerebral/ renal) due to polycythaemia and
coagulopathy due to platelet dysfunction and fibrinogen deficiency may
occur. i tissue vascularity may worsen bleeding.
• Air emboli: any intracardiac shunt (particularly right-t o- left) poses the
risk of air entering the coronary or cerebral circulation, with potentially
catastrophic consequences. Meticulous ‘bubble precautions’ should
be taken.
• ‘Duct- dependent’ or single ventricle physiology. In order to be
compatible with life, some lesions (e.g. tricuspic atresia, hypoplastic
left heart syndrome, severe aortic coarctation) require a patent ductus
arteriosus to maintain blood flow to either pulmonary or systemic
vascular beds; they will require a continuous prostaglandin infusion to
achieve this. these patients should be managed in specialist centres
as they are extremely sensitive to changes in PVr/ SVr, myocardial
contractility and preload. Aim to keep physiological parameters (e.g.
SpO) as close to what is normal for the patient as far as possible.
2
Patients dependent on a Blalock– taussig shunt (see % p. 137) to
maintain pulmonary perfusion share similar characteristics.
• eisenmenger’s syndrome. Irreversible elevation in PVr occurring in
response to chronic high pulmonary flow (i.e. any large left-t o- right
shunt that is left untreated). Shunt reversal occurs, with consequent
cyanosis. the degree of shunting depends on the PVr:SVr ratio.
Increasing SVr or decreasing PVr leads to higher arterial SpO. Avoid
2
reductions in SVr (neuraxial anaesthesia) and rises in PVr (hypoxia/
hypercapnia / acidosis). Associated with i morbidity and mortality.

<!-- Page 157 -->
316
136 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Specific congenital heart disease lesions
there are >100 forms of CHD, but the commonest lesions are: ASD,
VSD, PDA, toF, AS, coarctation of the aorta and transposition of the great
arteries. Lesions not amenable to biventricular repair are usually man-
aged palliatively by producing a Fontan circulation (also known as a total
cavopulmonary connection).
Atrial septal defect (secundum type)
• A defect in the membrane of the fossa ovalis, accounting for 80% of
ASDs. Often asymptomatic.
• results in a left- to- right shunt with right heart volume overload.
• Can be closed surgically or transcatheter.
Atrial septal defect (primum type)
• endocardial cushion (or partial atrioventricular (AV) canal) defect—m ay
involve AV valves.
• the more severe form AVSD is associated with Down’s syndrome and
results in severe pulmonary hypertension if left untreated (see
% pp. 139–44).
• Surgical repair of these lesions may result in complete heart block.
Ventricular septal defect
• Commonest form of CHD, resulting in a left- to- right shunt which, in
turn, causes i pulmonary blood flow and left heart volume overload. As
with any lesion causing excessive pulmonary blood flow, they are at risk
of developing pulmonary hypertension and shunt reversal (see
% p. 135, eisenmenger’s syndrome).
• A small single VSD may be asymptomatic with a small left-t o- right shunt
(pulmonary:systemic flow (Q:Q) ratio <1.5:1).
p s
• A moderate VSD (Q:Q ratio 2– 3:1) may present with mild CCF.
p s
• Patients with a large VSD have equal pressures in their right and left
ventricles and present at around 2mo of age with severe CCF. they
require early repair. However, if they need anaesthesia for another
procedure prior to definitive cardiac surgery, they can be challenging.
they should be intubated for all but the most minor procedures,
and increases in the left-t o- right shunt should be avoided (e.g. avoid
hyperventilation and high FiO). Care should be taken with fluid
2
administration, and inotropic support may be required.
• those unsuitable for definitive repair (e.g. very small babies, multiple
muscular VSDs) may require PA banding to protect the pulmonary
circulation, preventing the development of pulmonary hypertension.
this band tightens as the child grows, leading to rV pressure loading
and progressive cyanosis. the band is removed when the child is large
enough for full repair or the defects have closed spontaneously.
• May be closed transcatheter in certain circumstances.
Patent ductus arteriosus
• represents 10% of CHD lesions. Incidence is 20– 30% in preterm
neonates. Produces a left- to- right shunt, resulting in CCF and
raised PVr. Diastolic run- off from the proximal aorta to the PA can
compromise distal organ perfusion (e.g. gut, kidneys).
• Can be closed surgically or transcatheter.

<!-- Page 158 -->
SPeCIFIC CONGeNItAL HeArt DISeASe LeSIONS 137
Tetralogy of Fallot
• Pulmonary stenosis, VSD, overriding aorta and rV hypertrophy.
• May be prone to cyanotic episodes (‘tet spells’) due to intermittent rV
infundibular spasm causing i right-t o- left shunting. If this occurs under
anaesthesia, treatment includes: 100% O, IV fluid, adequate analgesia/
2
anaesthesia to reduce circulating catecholamines and increasing SVr
(e.g. by bringing the knees towards the chest and/ or IV vasopressors).
• Before full repair, may be treated medically with β- blockers or surgically
via a modified Blalock– taussig shunt— a Gore- tex® tube interposed
between the subclavian and pulmonary arteries.
• Full repair of toF is usually undertaken in the first 6mo of life.
Transposition of the great arteries
• Accounts for 7– 8% of CHD, in which the aorta arises from the rV and
the PA from the LV; a VSD occurs in 730%.
• In order to be compatible with life, there must be a source of mixing
(i.e. PDA, ASD or VSD) to allow oxygenated pulmonary venous blood
to reach the systemic circulation.
• Preoperative management usually consists of a prostaglandin infusion ±
balloon atrial septostomy if mixing is inadequate.
• repair is usually with an arterial switch procedure in the first 2w of life.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome and the Fontan circulation
• Hypoplastic left heart syndrome accounts for around 2% of CHD and
carries a significant mortality risk, with 770% surviving to 5y.
• Patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome undergo a 3-s tage repair,
usually involving a neonatal Norwood operation, followed by a Glenn
shunt at 3– 6mo, and finally a completion Fontan procedure (also called
a total cavopulmonary connection) at 3– 5y.
• After total cavopulmonary connection, all superior vena cava (SVC)
and IVC blood flows directly into the PA, bypassing the right heart.
Pulmonary blood flow is thus passively dependent on systemic venous
pressure.
• the aim is to volume-o ffload the rV, while providing acceptable arterial
saturations (75– 85%); however, the Fontan circulation inevitably leads
to high venous pressures, liver congestion, protein- losing enteropathy
and pleural and pericardial effusions.
• Hypovolaemia can lead to hypoxia and CVS collapse. IPPV results in
a fall in CO, and high ventilatory pressures result in poor pulmonary
perfusion.
• these children are particularly vulnerable and should be managed in a
specialist centre, whenever possible.

<!-- Page 159 -->
318
138 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Adults with congenital heart disease
Anything but the most straightforward situation should be discussed, and
the patient referred to a congenital cardiac centre.
Uncorrected disease
• ASDs/ VSDs may be small and of no haemodynamic significance. Apart
from the risk of paradoxical emboli, small defects present with no
anaesthetic issues.
• Large left- to- right shunts will cause progressive pulmonary hypertension
and eventual shunt reversal (eisenmenger’s syndrome). Once
irreversible pulmonary hypertension has developed, surgical correction
is not possible. these patients are at high risk. If surgery is absolutely
necessary, it should be performed in a specialist centre.
Corrected disease
• these patients have either had spontaneous resolution or a corrective
procedure. they can generally be treated as normal.
• Best assessment of CVS function is generally exercise tolerance.
• exclude surgical sequelae/c ontinuing disease.
• exclude any associated congenital abnormalities.
Palliated disease
• these patients have had operations that improve functional capacity
and life expectancy but do not restore normal anatomy. Operations
include Senning and Mustard for transposition of the great arteries
(arterial switch is now preferred) and Fontan pathway for single
ventricle lesions (e.g. hypoplastic left heart syndrome and pulmonary
atresia).
• An understanding of the underlying physiology is required to avoid
complications when anaesthetising these patients. Management is best
provided in specialist cardiac centres.
• In patients with a Fontan circulation, blood leaves a single ventricle and
passes through the systemic circulation, then through the pulmonary
circulation, before returning to the heart. As a result, the systemic
venous pressure is high, providing a pressure gradient across the
pulmonary vascular bed. Any pulmonary hypertension is poorly
tolerated and results in reduced ventricular filling. the high venous
pressure can result in life- threatening haemorrhage from mucosal
procedures such as adenoidectomy (or nasal intubation!).

<!-- Page 160 -->
PULMONArY HYPerteNSION 139
Pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension describes a situation of elevated pressure in the
pulmonary circulation. Pulmonary hypertension has many aetiologies and
can complicate most cardiovascular and respiratory conditions (table 5.11).
Although the aetiology may be different, the sequelae of endothelial dys-
function, vasoconstriction and vascular remodelling are common.25
Normal mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) is 14mmHg. Pulmonary
hypertension is defined as a mPAP ≥25mmHg measured by right heart cath-
eterisation at rest.
• Mild mPAP 25– 40mmHg
• Moderate mPAP 41– 55mmHg
• Severe mPAP >55mmHg.
Pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) is distinct from the other classes of
pulmonary hypertension and is defined as pre- capillary pulmonary hyper-
tension with PA occlusion pressure ≤15mmHg and PVr >3 Wood units,
in the absence of other causes of pre- capillary pulmonary hypertension.
PAH accounts for 45% of pulmonary hypertension, with chronic thrombo-
embolic pulmonary hypertension being the second commonest (19%), fol-
lowed by left heart disease. Pulmonary hypertension is classified into groups
of similar pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical presentation and haemo-
dynamic characteristics (table 5.11).26
Table 5.11 Updated clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension
Class Aetiology Examples
1 PAH Idiopathic PAH, drug- or toxin- induced,
associated with CHD/ portal hypertension/ HIV
or persistent pulmonary pulmonary hypertension
of the newborn
2 Pulmonary Pulmonary hypertension due to heart failure
hypertension due (HFpeF and HFreF), valvular disease and
to left heart disease congenital cardiomyopathies
3 Pulmonary Obstructive, restrictive or mixed lung disease,
hypertension due hypoxia without lung disease and developmental
to lung disease lung disorders
and/ or hypoxia
4 Pulmonary Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension due hypertension and other PA obstructions
to pulmonary
artery obstructions
5 Pulmonary Haematological disorders, systemic and metabolic
hypertension with disorders, complex CHD
unclear mechanism

<!-- Page 161 -->
410
140 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Symptoms and signs
Symptoms are non- specific and initially exercise induced, mainly related to
rV dysfunction and low cardiac output state, such as dyspnoea, fatigue,
angina and syncope. rupture or distension of vessels in the pulmonary vas-
cular bed may cause symptoms, e.g. haemoptysis and hoarse voice (com-
pression of left recurrent laryngeal nerve). Other symptoms related to the
causative disease process may also be present. examination may reveal
signs of right heart failure, a pansystolic murmur (tricuspid regurgitation)
and a diastolic murmur (pulmonary regurgitation).
Diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension
• right heart catheterisation is the gold standard for diagnosis as mPAP
can be measured directly.
• tOe is often the 1° investigation due to its availability. Pulmonary artery
systolic pressure (PASP) is estimated from peak tricuspid regurgitation
velocity and right atrial pressure can be used to stratify pulmonary
hypertension. Note the stratification is different to that obtained
from right heart catheterisation (mild pulmonary hypertension: PASP
35– 45mmHg; moderate pulmonary hypertension: PASP 46–5 9mmHg;
severe pulmonary hypertension: PASP >60mmHg).
• the aetiology of pulmonary hypertension may also be diagnosed by
echocardiography.
• eCG: may be normal or show P pulmonale, right axis deviatio, rV
hypertrophy, right bundle branch block, rV strain or prolonged
corrected Qt.
• the 6MWt is the most widely used test for prognostication.27
• CPet is becoming more widely used for therapeutic decision-m aking
and adds to information from the 6MWt.28
Other tests should then be used to delineate the aetiology25
• CXr: COPD and sarcoidosis
• Computed tomography pulmonary angiography or V/Q scan:
thromboembolic disease
• Sleep studies: OSA
• Liver ultrasound: portopulmonary hypertension
• Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MrI): cardiomyopathy and CHD.
Severity
Severity of pulmonary hypertension can be classified by mPAP and PASP
(see above) or functionally using the NYHA classification (table 5.12).
Treatment
PAH remains an incurable condition. treatment advances in the last decade
have slowed progression and improved symptoms, but prognosis remains
poor. Pulmonary hypertension-s pecific therapies (table 5.13) are licensed
for PAH only. In the UK, only pulmonary hypertension specialists are able
to prescribe them.
treatment options for other classes of pulmonary hypertension largely
depend on treating the underlying cause. Patients with chronic thrombo-
embolic pulmonary hypertension should be referred for consideration for
pulmonary endarterectomy and they may be also considered for some pul-
monary hypertension- specific therapies as per PAH.25

<!-- Page 162 -->
PULMONArY HYPerteNSION 141
Table 5.12 New York Heart Association functional classification of pulmonary
hypertension
Class
1 Pulmonary hypertension with no symptoms or limitation to ordinary
physical activity
2 Pulmonary hypertension with mild symptoms and slight limitation during
ordinary activity
3 Pulmonary hypertension with marked limitation of physical activity.
Comfortable at rest
4 Pulmonary hypertension with signs of right heart failure, possibly even at
rest. Inability to carry out any activity without symptoms
Table 5.13 treatment for pulmonary artery hypertension
Treatment Notes
Non- specific treatment Anticoagulation (idiopathic
PAH only)
Diuretics for decompensated right
heart failure
O reduces PVr, but no evidence
2
for long- term O therapy
2
Calcium channel blockers <10% of patients benefit
Synthetic prostacyclin analogues epoprostenol shown to improve
(epoprostenol, iloprost, treprostinil) survival in idiopathic PAH
treprostinil and inhaled iloprost
shown to improve symptoms and
reduce clinical events
endothelin receptor antagonists Macitentan reduces progression of PAH
and death. Ambrisentan and bosentan
improve symptoms ± progression
PDe- 5 inhibitors Sildenafil and tadalafil improve exercise
capacity and symptoms
Guanylate cyclase stimulation riociguat beneficial in PAH
transplantation Heart– lung and double- lung
transplantation improves survival in
idiopathic PAH

<!-- Page 163 -->
412
142 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Anaesthesia
(See % pp. 524–5 for cardiac surgery and pulmonary hypertension.)
evidence is lacking, but postoperative mortality after non- cardiac surgery
ranges from 4–20% depending on the series. Although rV contractility can
be normal in mild disease, systolic dysfunction is common and progresses
with worsening class of pulmonary hypertension. Systemic BP is usually low
(disease- and treatment-r elated). table 5.14 lists some of the factors that
are used to assess the 1y mortality risk.27 Consider referring any patient in
the intermediate- or high- risk categories to a specialist pulmonary hyper-
tension centre for their surgery.
Risk factors associated with increased perioperative mortality and morbidity25
• NYHA class ≥2
• 6MWt <300m
• PVr >400dyn.s.cm– 5
• elevated right atrial pressure (>14 mmHg)
• Low cardiac index in right heart catheterisation (<2.4L/m 2)
• History of: CAD, Pe, chronic kidney disease (CKD) and rV
hypertrophy with severe systolic dysfunction
• emergency surgery
• Intermediate- / high- risk surgery
• Duration of surgery >3h
• Intraoperative vasopressor requirement.
Table 5.14 Some determinants used to estimate 1y mortality (mainly based on
expert opinion)
Low risk Medium risk High risk
<5% 5– 10% >10%
Clinical signs Absent Absent Present
Progressive No Slow rapid
symptoms
WHO functional I II– III IV
class
6MWT >440m 165– 440m <165m
CPET Peak VO 2 >65% Peak VO 2 35– 65% Peak VO 2 <35%
predicted predicted predicted
Ve/ VCO <36 Ve/ VCO Ve/ VCO >45
2 2 2
36– 44.9
Biochemical BNP <50 BNP 50– 300 BNP >300
markers nanograms/ L nanograms/ L nanograms/ L
Nt- proBNP <300 Nt- proBNP 300– Nt- proBNP
nanograms/ L 1400 nanograms/ L >1400
nanograms/ L
Imaging right atrial right atrial area right atrial
area <18cm2 18– 26cm2 area >26cm2
No pericardial No/ minimal Pericardial
effusion pericardial effusion
effusion
Source: data from Galiè N et al., 2015 eSC/erS Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of pulmonary hypertension), European Heart Journal, 2016;37(1):67–119, M https://doi.
org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehv317.

<!-- Page 164 -->
PULMONArY HYPerteNSION 143
Perioperative management25
H Maintain rV and pulmonary circulation coupling, and prevent a pul-
monary hypertension crisis.
• Many anaesthetic drugs affect rV contractility and PVr (table 5.15).
• Basic haemodynamic goals:
• Maintain systolic BP at baseline if possible, or at least a minimum
systolic pressure of 90mmHg and 40mmHg above systolic PAP.
• MAP ≥65mmHg and 20mmHg above mPAP.
• Lowest right atrial pressure to maintain MAP >65mmHg.
• Give supplementary O (O is a pulmonary vasodilator); avoid hypoxic
2 2
pulmonary vasoconstriction.
• Avoid hypothermia (causes pulmonary vasoconstriction and V/Q
mismatch).
• Invasive arterial monitoring to aid rapid response to changes in BP and
allow for intermittent sampling.
• Intraoperative tOe or PA catheter should be considered in all patients
with severe pulmonary hypertension or evidence of right heart failure.
• Obtund sympathetic response to laryngoscopy to avoid increase in
PVr and atrial tachyarrhythmias, which can lead to right heart failure
and death. For rhythm control, amiodarone is the drug of choice; use
digoxin if rhythm control not possible. β- blockade is poorly tolerated.
Table 5.15 effect of anaesthetic drugs in pulmonary hypertension
Medication Effect
Isoflurane, desflurane, Marked, dose- dependent reduction in rV
sevoflurane contractility
Increase in PVr (not sevoflurane)
Propofol reduces rV contractility, rV ejection fraction and
cardiac index
thiopental reduced rV contractility and SVr
Ketamine Increases PVr (adults only)
Vasopressors: noradrenaline, Improve perfusion of right coronary artery, reduce
vasopressin PVr/ SVr ratio, enhance rV contractility and
marginally improve CO
Inotropes: adrenaline, Increase rV contractility
dobutamine, levosimendan
Inodilators: PDe- 3 inhibitors reduce PVr and improve PVr/ SVr ratio.
(e.g. milrinone) reduction in SVr can compromise coronary artery
blood flow
IV vasodilator: sildenafil Can be given PO and IV, so could be an option for
patients already on oral therapy
Inhaled pulmonary Nitric oxide, epoprostenol, prostacyclin, iloprost
vasodilators and treprostinil have all been used perioperatively,
but in small numbers

<!-- Page 165 -->
414
144 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
• Use low- dose vasoconstrictor to maintain systolic BP if needed.
• Conventional ventilation with low PeeP is generally well tolerated (PeeP
reduces atelectasis, mPAP and shunt but increases rV afterload, as does
hypercapnia and acidosis).
• Patients are preload- dependent but tolerate overload poorly. Fluid
therapy should be targeted and restrictive. Consider CVP monitoring to
estimate baseline preload. Blood loss should be replaced promptly.
• CNB is safe, but acute hypotension must be avoided. Gradual lumbar
epidural anaesthesia may be considered to minimise rapid block of
sympathetic fibres. Increases in both Hr and pulmonary afterload cause
reflex increases in rV contractility via thoracic sympathetic fibres. this
homeometric autoregulation maintains coupling between the rV and
pulmonary circulation. Blocking these fibres with a thoracic epidural
could cause a critical reduction in CO, leading to right heart failure.
• Prepare for events during surgery which may affect preload, afterload
or pulmonary flow, e.g. cementing during orthopaedic surgery,
microemboli after tourniquet release, pneumoperitoneum during
laparoscopic surgery, cross- clamping of major blood vessels and change
of patient positioning.
• Pain should be planned for and treated aggressively.
• HDU/ ICU postoperatively.
• Common causes of postoperative death are right heart failure,
arrhythmias, sepsis, Pe, respiratory failure and MI.
Pregnancy and pulmonary hypertension25
• Mortality is still high and patients should be advised accordingly.
• Most centres favour elective CS over vaginal delivery.
• there is no consensus on whether GA or regional anaesthesia is better;
maternal morbidity remains around 20%.
• Deaths occur due to rHF and Pe.

<!-- Page 166 -->
PerIOPerAtIVe ArrHYtHMIAS 145
Perioperative arrhythmias
(See also % Chapter 39.)
Perioperative cardiac arrhythmias are common and may result in signifi-
cant morbidity and mortality. In the setting of pre-e xisting arrhythmia, rate
and rhythm control should be optimised prior to surgery, as perioperative
stressors can lead to marked deterioration.
Preoperative recognition of potential risk factors and triggers may allow
prevention and/ or rapid management of arrhythmia.
When providing IV drug treatment for arrhythmia management, ensure a
defibrillator is readily available in case of rhythm deterioration.
risk factors for new-o nset perioperative arrhythmia or deterioration of
pre- existing arrhythmia may be classified according to patient factors and
context- specific triggers (table 5.16).
Table 5.16 risk factors for perioperative arrhythmia
Patient factors Pre- existing cardiac disease (e.g. IHD, conduction
abnormality, valvular disease, heart failure)
Advanced age
electrolyte disturbance
Hormonal imbalance (e.g. thyroid dysfunction,
phaeochromocytoma)
Due to acute disease process (e.g. LrtI, sepsis, SAH,
anaemia, Pe)
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Anaesthetic triggers Intubation
Drug- induced (e.g. anticholinergics, LA toxicity)
Hypoxia
Inadequate pain management
electrolyte abnormalities
Intraoperative hypotension
Insertion of central vascular catheters
Surgical triggers Cardiothoracic surgery
Pneumoperitoneum
Activation of ANS reflex (e.g. oculocardiac reflex in
ophthalmic surgery, peritoneal traction)
Intravascular fluid shifts
ANS, autonomic nervous system; IHD, ischaemic heart disease; LA, local anaesthetic; LrtI,
lower respiratory tract infection; Pe, pulmonary embolism; SAH, subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Practical diagnosis of arrhythmias
• Assess ABC.
• ensure appropriate monitoring is applied: SpO, eCG and NIBP.
2
• Provide O if hypoxic.
2
• ensure adequate IV access.
• Assess for presence of adverse features (shock, syncope, myocardial
ischaemia or heart failure). If present, emergency management is required.

<!-- Page 167 -->
416
146 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Arrhythmia assessment is ideally undertaken with a 12- lead eCG. this
is often impractical intraoperatively. Alternative leads may be interrogated
using a traditional 3- or 5- lead intraoperative eCG configuration.
Determine
• What is the ventricular rate?
• Is the QrS complex of normal duration or widened?
• Is the QrS regular or irregular?
• Are P waves present, and are they normally shaped?
• How is atrial activity related to ventricular activity?
Ventricular rate
• Calculate the approximate ventricular rate (divide 300 by the number of
large squares between each QrS complex).
• tachyarrhythmia: rate >100bpm; bradyarrhythmia: rate <60bpm.
QRS complex
• Supraventricular rhythms include nodal rhythms and arise from a focus
above the ventricles. Since the ventricles still depolarise via the normal
His/ Purkinje system, the QrS complexes are of normal width (<120ms
or three small squares) and are termed ‘narrow complex rhythms’.
• Arrhythmias arising from a ventricular focus will be ‘broad complex’
with a QrS width of >0.12s. In the presence of AV or bundle branch
block, a supraventricular rhythm may have broad complexes (2%).
Regularity
• Irregular rhythm suggests ectopic beats (atrial or ventricular), AF, atrial
flutter with variable block or 2nd- degree heart block with variable
block.
P waves
• the presence of P waves indicates atrial depolarisation. Absent P waves
with an irregular ventricular rhythm suggest AF, whereas a sawtoothed
pattern is characteristic of atrial flutter.
Atrial/ ventricular activity
• Normally, there will be one P wave per QrS complex. Any change in
this ratio indicates a block to conduction between atria and ventricles.

<!-- Page 168 -->
NArrOW COMPLeX ArrHYtHMIAS 147
Narrow complex arrhythmias
Narrow complex arrhythmias are characterised by QrS complexes <0.12s.
Sinus arrhythmia
Irregular spacing of normal complexes associated with respiration. Constant
P– r interval, with beat- to- beat change in the r– r interval. Normal finding,
especially in young people.
Sinus bradycardia
rate <60bpm, with normal P–Q rS– t complexes. Unnecessary to cor-
rect in a fit person with no haemodynamic compromise (usually when Hr
>40bpm). May be normal in athletic patients or due to vagal stimulation.
Other causes include: drugs (e.g. β- blockers, digoxin, anticholinesterases,
halothane, suxamethonium), MI, sick sinus syndrome, raised intracranial
pressure (ICP), hypothyroidism and hypothermia. Correct the underlying
cause, e.g. stop the surgical stimulus. Incremental doses of atropine up to
20 micrograms/ kg, or glycopyrronium up to 10 micrograms/k g IV. Patients
on β- blockers may be resistant, and an isoprenaline infusion is occasionally
required (0.5– 10 micrograms/ min) (adrenaline is an alternative).
temporary cardiac pacing is rarely required.
Sick sinus syndrome
May coexist with AV nodal disease. episodes of AV block, atrial tachycardia,
atrial flutter and AF may occur.
• the commonest causes are congenital and advanced age.
• May be asymptomatic or present with dizziness or syncope.
• Consider permanent pacing if symptomatic.
Atrial ectopics
these are common and benign. Causes include: ischaemia/ hypoxia, inad-
equate depth of anaesthesia, sepsis, shock and anaesthetic drugs.
Correct any underlying cause, but treatment unnecessary if solitary.
Long QT syndrome
• Can be genetic or drug- induced and causes prolonged ventricular
repolarisation due to abnormalities in the cardiac ion channels. It
can lead to polymorphic Vt or torsade de pointes and subsequent
ventricular fibrillation (VF). Around 60% of patients are symptomatic
(syncope, seizure- like episodes, cardiac arrest).
• Patients should have preoperative cardiology assessment, as there is a
high risk of perioperative malignant ventricular arrhythmias which may
be refractory.
• Avoid medications that have well- documented or moderate association
with prolonged Qt (e.g. ondansetron, octreotide, macrolides,
amiodarone, droperidol) and use caution with drugs with i potential
to precipitate torsade de pointes in genetic long Qt (e.g. ephedrine,
phenylephrine, adrenaline, cocaine).
• Perioperative management includes β- blockade.
• Normalise all electrolytes and prevent sympathetic activation (pain,
sedative premedication, laryngoscopy, extubation, hypercapnia, etc.).

<!-- Page 169 -->
418
148 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
• Invasive monitoring is advisable. Maintain temperature (hypothermia
prolongs Qt) and adequate analgesia is essential.
• For torsade de pointes management, see % p. 153.
• Consider postoperative ICU.
Regular supraventricular tachycardia
Sinus tachycardia
rate >100bpm with normal P–Q rS– t complexes. Most often an appro-
priate autonomic response to a physiological stress.
Causes include:
• Inadequate depth of anaesthesia, pain, surgical stimulation
• Fever/ sepsis, hypovolaemia, anaemia, heart failure, thyrotoxicosis
• Drugs, e.g. atropine, ketamine, catecholamines.
• Correct the underlying cause where possible.
AV nodal re- entry tachycardia
Often paroxysmal with sudden onset. rate 150– 200bpm.
Caused by re-e ntry circuit within the AV node comprising two pathways
with different conduction speeds. P wave often obscured by QrS complex
due to almost simultaneous activation of atria and ventricles.
terminates with adenosine administration.
AV re- entry tachycardia
Sudden onset. rate 150–2 00bpm. Caused by abnormal myocardial fibres
that form an accessory pathway bypassing the AV node. Conduction
through this pathway may be ante- or retrograde. eCG morphology de-
pends on the direction of electrical travel through the re-e ntry circuit. In
orthodromic conduction (via AV node with retrograde conduction through
accessory pathway), P waves occur after narrow QrS complex. In anti-
dromic conduction (via accessory pathway with retrograde conduction
through AV node), there are regular wide QrS complexes due to slow ven-
tricular depolarisation. terminates with adenosine administration.
Wolff– Parkinson– White (WPW) syndrome
A type of congenital AV re- entry tachycardia with evidence of pre-
excitation; early activation of ventricles due to bypass of AV node via an
accessory pathway. Classic eCG pattern of pre- excitation include: short Pr
interval (<120ms) and delta wave (Fig. 5.1). emergent treatment is DCCV.
Fig. 5.1 this patient has WPW syndrome as they have delta waves (slurred QrS
upstrokes) in beats 1 and 4 on this rhythm strip. the delta wave both broadens the
ventricular complex and shortens the Pr interval. If a patient with WPW has AF,
avoid AV node blockers such as diltiazem, verapamil and digoxin—b ut flecainide
may be used. reproduced with permission of Oxford Publishing Limited through PLSclear from
Wilkinson I et al. Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine. © Oxford University Press 2017.

<!-- Page 170 -->
NArrOW COMPLeX ArrHYtHMIAS 149
Atrial flutter
Often caused by a re- entry circuit at the tricuspid valve. Associated with
cardiac disease. Atrial depolarisation is 7300bpm. However, ventricular rate
is determined by AV conduction, resulting in an AV block. the commonest
AV ratio is 2:1. Higher degrees of AV block can occur, usually due to drugs
which lower ventricular conduction.
Associated risk of thromboembolism similar to AF.
Acute management entails:
• Synchronised DCCV if adverse features are present or new onset under
anaesthesia. requires sedation or GA, but lower energy (70– 120J) may
suffice.29 Nearly 100% conversion.
• If haemodynamically stable: vagal manoeuvres, carotid sinus massage or
Valsalva manoeuvre may terminate re- entry SVt and may be helpful in
differentiating SVt from atrial flutter and fast AF. Adenosine blocks AV
nodal conduction and is especially useful for terminating re-e ntry SVt.
Give 6mg IV rapidly, followed by a large 0.9% sodium chloride flush into
a large proximal vein (e.g. antecubital). record eCG during the injection.
If rate slows, look for atrial activity to aid diagnosis. If no effect, give
12mg IV bolus. the effects of adenosine last only 10– 15s. It should be
used with caution in asthma due to risk of bronchospasm.
• Acute rate and rhythm control: β- blockers (rate) or amiodarone
(rhythm), as per treatment for AF below. Digoxin should be avoided
as it facilitates conduction through the AV accessory pathway in WPW
syndrome and may worsen tachycardia.
Irregular supraventricular tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation
• the most commonly sustained arrhythmia after surgery. Associated
with increase in length of stay, incidence of postoperative CVe and
in- hospital mortality.30 table 5.17 illustrates strategies to prevent
perioperative AF.31
• Disordered generation of atrial electrical impulses leads to
uncoordinated atrial activity that is conducted intermittently and
irregularly to the ventricles via the AV node (Fig. 5.2).
• Atrial contraction contributes up to 30% of ventricular filling. the
onset of AF, particularly in the setting of rapid ventricular rate, causes a
reduction in ventricular filling and CO.
• thrombi may form within the atria, due in part to blood stasis, and
embolise systemically. Annual risk of thromboembolic events and need
for anticoagulation may be estimated with prognostic models (i.e.
CHADS- VASc).
2 2
• eCG demonstrates: irregularly irregular rhythm without P waves,
narrow QrS (<120ms) unless conduction abnormality (e.g. pre-
existing bundle branch block), variable ventricular rate and absence of
isoelectric baseline. Aberrancy, or functional conduction delay, refers to
the broadening of the QrS as the rate gets faster.
Management of acute atrial fibrillation
• Goal: restore CO and ensure adequate oxygenation.
• Determine presence of adverse features: shock, syncope, myocardial
ischaemia and heart failure.31

<!-- Page 171 -->
510
150 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
• In patients with no adverse features present, evaluate underlying causes
and correct precipitating factors where possible. either a rate or a
rhythm control management strategy is reasonable.
• If adverse features present, perform urgent synchronised DCCV. Start
at 120– 150J, and increase incrementally if required.
• Anticoagulation should be started as soon as possible and continued for
at least 4w; but ideally lifelong if otherwise not contraindicated. (See
table 5.18.)32
Table 5.17 Prevention of new- onset AF or rapid ventricular rate in pre- existing/
paroxysmal AF
Preoperative Assess patient risk factors
Formulate plan for perioperative anticoagulation
Continue AV nodal- blocking drugs until morning of
surgery (e.g. β- blockers, CCBs)
Investigate causes of new- onset AF
Consider delaying surgery in patients with rVr
Intraoperative Avoid and treat anaesthetic- / surgery- related triggers
treat unstable AF rVr with electrical cardioversion
treat stable AF rVr with rate control agents
Avoid arrhythmogenic drugs (i.e. ketamine, adrenergic
vasopressors, glycopyrronium)
Postoperative Consider CPAP in patients with OSA
POCUS in patients with haemodynamic instability
treat unstable AF with electrical cardioversion
treat stable AF with rate control agents
Continue rate control agents at discharge until follow-u p
Antithrombotic therapy when appropriate
AV, atrioventricular; CCB, calcium channel blocker; OSA, obstructive sleep apnoea; POCUS,
point- of- care ultrasound; rVr, rapid ventricular rate.
Karamchandani K, Khanna AK, Bose S; et al (2020) Atrial fibrillation: current evidence and man-
agement strategies during the perioperative period. Anesth Anal 130(1); 2-13.
Table 5.18 Anticoagulation for AF rhythm control
Low risk Consider anticoagulation prior to DCCV
CHADS- VASc 0 Anticoagulation not needed
2 2
<48h duration post- cardioversion
Higher risk Start anticoagulation ASAP prior
CHADS- VASc ≥1 to DCCV
2 2
<48h duration Long- term anticoagulation recommended
>48h or unknown duration Anticoagulation ≥3w prior to DCCV

<!-- Page 172 -->
NArrOW COMPLeX ArrHYtHMIAS 151
Acute ventricular rate control33
• β- blockers— esmolol 0.5mg/ kg IV bolus over 1min; then 0.05–
0.25mg/k g/ min or metoprolol 2.5– 10mg IV bolus. Caution in HFreF.
Cardioselective β- blockers are unlikely to adversely affect respiratory
disease.
• Calcium channel blockers (diltiazem 15– 25mg IV or verapamil 2.5– 10mg
IV, repeated as required). Use with caution in combination with β-
blockers. Contraindicated in HFreF.
• Amiodarone may be used as 1st- line rate control in patients with HFreF,
as digoxin is often ineffective in high adrenergic states.34
Acute rhythm control33
DCCV restores Sr quicker and more effectively than pharmacological
cardioversion, but pharmacological cardioversion does not require sed-
ation/ GA or fasting. Amiodarone: 300mg IV loading dose (in 5% glucose)
via central vein over 1h, followed by 900mg over 23h. May be given via per-
ipheral line in an emergency but has a high incidence of thrombophlebitis.
Can be combined with digoxin or β- blockers. May precipitate bradycardia/
AV block/ hypotension.
Fig. 5.2 (a) AF: note the irregular spacing of QrS complexes and lack of P waves.
(b) AF with a rapid ventricular response (sometimes referred to as ‘fast AF’). No
pattern to QrS complex spacing, and rate >100bpm. (c) Atrial flutter with 2:1 block
(two P waves for every one QrS complex). the P waves have the classic ‘sawtooth’
appearance. Alternate P waves are merged with the QrS complex. reproduced with
permission of Oxford Publishing Limited through PLSclear from Wilkinson I et al. Oxford Handbook
of Clinical Medicine. © Oxford University Press 2017.

<!-- Page 173 -->
512
152 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Broad complex arrhythmias
Ventricular ectopics
In the absence of structural heart disease, these are usually benign, but in
patients with ventricular disease, they may occasionally herald the onset of
runs of ventricular tachycardia (Vt) (Fig. 5.3).
• Identify and correct any reversible causes (e.g. hypoxia, d K+, i Mg2+).
• If the underlying sinus rate is slow (<50bpm), then ‘ectopics’ may be
ventricular escape beats. try increasing the rate using IV atropine or
glycopyrronium.
Fig. 5.3 Bigeminy— a normal QrS is followed by a ventricular ectopic beat (*), then
a compensatory pause; this pattern then repeats. the ectopic beats have the same
morphology as each other, so probably all share an origin. reproduced with permission
of Oxford Publishing Limited through PLSclear from Wilkinson I et al. Oxford Handbook of Clinical
Medicine. © Oxford University Press 2017.
Ventricular tachycardia
this is a serious, potentially life-t hreatening arrhythmia. the QrS is always
wide. P waves may be seen if there is AV dissociation (Fig. 5.4). May be
monomorphic (a single ventricular focus with uniform QrS complexes) or
polymorphic (multiple ventricular foci with an irregular QrS morphology).
Perioperative triggers include:
• Myocardial ischaemia, hypoxia and hypotension
• Fluid overload
• electrolyte imbalance (low K+, Mg2+, etc.)
• Injection of adrenaline or other catecholamines
• Drugs which prolong the Qt interval (e.g. amiodarone, ondansetron,
haloperidol).
Fig. 5.4 Vt with a rate of 235/ min. reproduced with permission of Oxford Publishing
Limited through PLSclear from Wilkinson I et al. Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine. © Oxford
University Press 2017.
Management29,34
• Confirm the presence of CO (central pulse, arterial line waveform,
capnography).
• If no evidence of CO, commence cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPr)
and advanced cardiovascular life support with immediate defibrillation.

<!-- Page 174 -->
BrOAD COMPLeX ArrHYtHMIAS 153
• If evidence of CO, assess for adverse features. If present, promptly
perform synchronised DCCV (start at 120– 150J; increase if required). If
the patient relapses into Vt, amiodarone may be given to sustain Sr.
• If no adverse features present, treat with amiodarone 300mg IV,
preferably via a CVC, over 20– 60min, followed by 900mg over 23h.
Torsade de pointes
A type of polymorphic Vt occurring in the context of prolonged Qt.
Defined by a characteristic of the QrS complexes twisting around the eCG
isoelectric line, with a high risk of degenerating into VF (Fig. 5.5). Often
associated with haemodynamic compromise, necessitating immediate de-
fibrillation.33 even if there is evidence of CO, defibrillation is performed as
synchronisation is not possible.
If stable, give Mg2+ 2g IV loading dose over 10– 20min. Continue Mg2+
infusion at 1–4 g/ h. Monitor plasma levels. Consult cardiology for ongoing
management and preventative therapy.
Do not give amiodarone as Qt interval will be prolonged further.
Fig. 5.5 torsade de pointes tachycardia. reproduced with permission of Oxford
Publishing Limited through PLSclear from Wilkinson I et al. Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine. ©
Oxford University Press 2017.
Supraventricular tachycardia with aberrant conduction
An SVt may be broad complex due to aberrant conduction between the
atria and ventricles. this may appear only at high Hrs (rate- related aberrant
conduction). SVt caused by an abnormal or accessory pathway (e.g. WPW
syndrome) will be of normal width if conduction in the accessory pathway
is retrograde (i.e. it is the normal pathway that initiates the QrS complex),
but broad complex if conduction is anterograde in the accessory pathway.
Adenosine may be used diagnostically to slow AV conduction and may re-
veal the underlying rhythm in atrial flutter or atrial tachycardia. In the case
of SVt, it may also result in conversion to Sr. In practice, however, all broad
complex tachycardias should be treated as Vt until proven otherwise.
Ventricular fibrillation
• this results in cardiac arrest. there is chaotic and disorganised
contraction of the ventricular muscle, and no QrS complexes can be
identified on the eCG (Fig. 5.6).
• Immediate DCCV as per established resuscitation protocol (200J) (see
% pp. 1055–7).
Fig. 5.6 VF. reproduced with permission of Oxford Publishing Limited through PLSclear from
Wilkinson I et al. Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine. © Oxford University Press 2017.

<!-- Page 175 -->
514
154 CHAPter 5 Cardiovascular disease
Disturbances of conduction (heart block)
First- degree block
Delay in conduction through the AV node to the ventricles. Prolongation of
the P– r interval to >200ms. Normally benign but may progress to 2nd- or
3rd- degree block (Fig. 5.7).
Second- degree block— Mobitz type I (Wenckebach)
Progressive lengthening of the P– r interval and then failure of conduction
of an atrial beat. this is followed by a conducted beat, and the cycle repeats.
Common in young athletic adults with high vagal tone. May occur during
inferior MI and tends to be self- limiting. Asymptomatic patients do not nor-
mally require treatment perioperatively but may require long-t erm pacing,
as Wenckebach block may progress to higher degrees of block (Fig. 5.7).
Second- degree block— Mobitz type II
Intermittent atrial depolarisation without a subsequent ventricular beat (2:1
or 3:1 are common forms). this often progresses to complete heart block
(Fig. 5.7).
Third- degree block/ complete heart block
Complete failure of conduction between the atria and ventricles.
Occasionally, a transient phenomenon due to severe vagal stimulation. Very
rarely, it may be congenital (Fig. 5.7).
Bundle branch block
If there is a delay in depolarisation of the right or left bundle branches, this
will cause a delay in depolarisation of part of the ventricular muscle, with
subsequent QrS widening.
Right bundle branch block
Wide complexes with an ‘rSr’ in lead V (may appear ‘M’-s haped) and
1
a small initial negative downward deflection, followed by a larger upward
positive wave, and then a 2nd downward wave in V. Often benign but may
6
be indicative of myocardial disease (Fig. 5.8).
Left bundle branch block
Septal depolarisation is reversed, with change in the initial direction of the
QrS complex in every lead. Left bundle branch block is nearly always rep-
resentative of a disease process. Further interpretation of the eCG, other
than the rate and rhythm, is difficult in the presence of left bundle branch
block (Fig. 5.9).
Bifascicular block
Combination of right bundle branch block and block of the left anterior
or left posterior fascicle. right bundle branch block with left anterior
hemiblock is more common and appears as an ‘rSr’ in V, together with
1
left axis deviation. right bundle branch block with left posterior hemiblock
is less common and appears as right bundle branch block with an abnormal
degree of right axis deviation. However, other causes for right axis devi-
ation should be considered, and it is a non- specific sign (Fig. 5.10).
