# Chapter 8: Hepatic Disease

## 肝臟疾病


--- Page 222 ---

Chapter 8 220011
Hepatic disease
Ashleigh Williams and John Christie
Liver disease 202
Anaesthetic management of patients with liver disease 205
Drug metabolism and liver disease 211
Postoperative liver dysfunction or jaundice 212

### Table
|  |  |
| --- | --- |

--- Page 223 ---

202
202 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
Liver disease
Liver disease can be classified as chronic liver disease (CLD) and acute liver
failure (ALF). ALF can be subclassified into hyperacute, subacute, and acute.
Common causes of ALF and CLD are listed in table 8.1.
Chronic liver disease
• CLD is defined as impairment of liver synthetic and metabolic function
present for >26w.
• Chronic inflammation leads to fibrosis and cirrhosis (nodular
regeneration and disruption of liver architecture), leading to portal
hypertension.
• Cirrhosis can be compensated (function preserved) or decompensated
(presence of ascites, encephalopathy or oesophageal varices).
• Once there is evidence of decompensation, survival is around 5y, so
assessment for transplantation should be considered.
• Portal hypertension in CLD leads to engorgement of the anastomoses
between portal and systemic circulations, leading to varices at the
gastro- oesophageal junction, haemorrhoids and dilated abdominal
wall veins (caput medusae). Patients with varices are at risk of acute
bleeding, which is associated with a high mortality rate.
• Impaired hepatic synthetic function leads to low albumin and plasma
proteins. this contributes to oedema/ ascites and has implications for
drug protein- binding.
• Ascites: liver fibrosis leads to portal hypertension and, in combination
with salt/ water retention 2° to hyperaldosteronism, splanchnic
vasodilation and low serum albumin, fluid accumulates in the peritoneal
cavity. More commonly seen in CLD. Spironolactone long term may
exacerbate electrolyte disturbances and renal dysfunction.
Acute liver failure
• ALF is a process involving rapidly progressing liver necrosis and an
inflammatory response with physiological derangement similar to sepsis.
• Patients develop the triad of hepatocellular dysfunction (jaundice),
coagulopathy and encephalopathy, without prior known liver disease.
• ALF can be classified by time interval from onset of jaundice to
encephalopathy (table 8.2).
• hyperacute ALF is typical of paracetamol overdose, although jaundice
is often absent (coagulopathy and deranged LFts used as surrogate for
onset time).
• the precipitating cause ultimately results in liver necrosis and an
inflammatory response with physiological derangement similar to sepsis.
Absence of hepatic encephalopathy, defined as acute liver injury, has a
better prognosis.
• For specific ALF management and referral criteria, see % p. 210.

--- Page 224 ---

LIver DISeASe 203
Table 8.1 Causes of liver failure
Cause Acute Chronic
Paracetamol Accounts for majority of
cases (>70%) in the UK
Alcohol Acute alcoholic hepatitis Commonest cause in the
UK. Chronic alcoholism
may be complicated by
alcohol withdrawal peri- or
postoperatively (see %
p. 338) or by acute alcoholic
hepatitis
Other drugs and Carbon tetrachloride, Isoniazid, methyldopa,
toxins Amanita phalloides methotrexate, amiodarone,
mushrooms, idiosyncratic carbon tetrachloride,
drug reactions Amanita phalloides
mushrooms
viral hepatitis Commonest cause hepatitis B: 3% of those
worldwide. types A– e, infected as an adult develop
cytomegalovirus, herpes chronic hepatitis B infection
simplex, epstein– Barr virus,
hepatitis C: 75% develop
seronegative hepatitis
chronic infection. Main risk
factor for infection is Iv
drug abuse
Table 8.2 Subtypes of acute liver failure
Subtype Onset Transplant- free survival (%)
hyperacute Within 7d 30
Acute 1w to 1mo 33
Subacute 1– 3mo 14
Liver disease: a multisystem problem
Renal
Impairment is most commonly due to dehydration, sepsis or nephrotoxic
drugs. renal failure in the context of liver failure confers a high mortality;
the precipitating cause should be investigated and treated. Up to 50% of
patients presenting with ALF will also have AKI. ensure adequate hydration
and renal blood flow.
Hepatorenal syndrome
A diagnosis of exclusion in patients with cirrhotic liver disease as a conse-
quence of altered renovascular tone. type 1: rapidly progressive; type 2:
slower in onset and associated with diuretic-r esistant ascites. Both are asso-
ciated with poor prognosis and liver transplantation may be the only defini-
tive treatment. Diagnostic criteria: urinary Na+ <10mmol/ L, urine:plasma
osmolality and creatinine ratios >1, normal CvP and no diuresis on central
volume expansion underlying CLD and ascites.

--- Page 225 ---

204
204 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Occurs when intrapulmonary vascular dilations contribute to hypoxia in
liver disease, possibly 2° to i production or d clearance of vasodilators
such as nitrous oxide (NO). Intrapulmonary shunting further contributes
2
to v/ Q mismatch, i A– a gradient and low PaO. the only definitive treat-
2
ment is liver transplantation.
Pulmonary hypertension
A serious complication present in 0.25– 4% of all patients with cirrhosis. It
is thought to occur due to local pulmonary production of vasoconstrictors
that occurs while systemically vasodilation predominates.
Encephalopathy
toxic metabolites build up (particularly ammonia, due to deranged amino
acid metabolism), leading to progressive encephalopathy (Box 8.1). Give
regular lactulose to prevent constipation. encephalopathy in CLD her-
alds decompensation and a precipitating cause should be sought. reduced
Glasgow coma scale (GCS) and loss of airway reflexes may cause respira-
tory failure. Patients with grade III/I v encephalopathy need intubation to
protect their airway and ventilation permits manipulation of ICP.
Box 8.1 West Haven classification of encephalopathy
Grade 0 Alert and orientated
Grade I Drowsy and orientated
Grade II Drowsy and disorientated
Grade III rousable stupor, restlessness
Grade Iv Coma: unresponsive to deep pain
Source: data from Conn hO et al. Comparison of lactulose and neomycin in the treatment
of chronic portal-systemic encephalopathy. A double blind controlled trial, Gastroenterology,
1989;72:573–83.

--- Page 226 ---

ANAeSthetIC MANAGeMeNt OF PA tIeNtS WIth LIver DISeASe 205
Anaesthetic management of patients
with liver disease
CLD presents to the anaesthetist and surgeon more frequently than acute
liver disease. While the underlying cause and disease course differ between
ALF and CLD, the physiological consequences are similar and will be dis-
cussed together. Specific considerations in ALF are discussed at the end.
Patients with liver disease have a high perioperative risk which is pro-
portional to the degree of hepatic dysfunction. All patients should have a
thorough preoperative assessment, including signs, symptoms and risk fac-
tors for liver disease.
• Symptoms: anorexia, malaise, weight loss, easy bruising, itching, right
upper quadrant (rUQ) pain
• Signs: jaundice, palmar erythema, spider naevi, caput medusae,
gynaecomastia, ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, testicular atrophy
• Risk factors: alcohol excess, Iv drug abuse, obesity, autoimmune
conditions, haemodialysis, haemophilia, unprotected sexual intercourse
and previous blood transfusion.
Risk assessment
• Assessment of risk for surgery and anaesthesia in CLD may be estimated
by the Child’s classification (table 8.3), originally designed to guide
mortality in portal decompressive surgery, or by the model for end-s tage
liver disease (MeLD) score, which was designed to predict 3mo survival
in transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (tIPSS) patients.
• MeLD scoring requires serum bilirubin, creatinine and INr. Online
calculator: M www.alchepscores.com
• Acute active hepatitis or liver failure is a contraindication to elective
surgery. elective surgery is contraindicated in Child–P ugh class C and
MeLD score >15 as mortality is 740%.
• Child– Pugh class B or MeLD score 10– 15 should be approached with
caution, and Child– Pugh class A or MeLD score <10 can proceed with
elective surgery.
• Generic illness severity scoring tools, such as SOFA (Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment) or APAChe II (Acute Physiology and Chronic health
evaluation II), may be more accurate in acutely unwell patients with CLD.
• Surgical risk in CLD depends on the extent of hepatic impairment,
in addition to the urgency and type of surgery. Common causes of
mortality in the perioperative period include sepsis, renal failure,
bleeding and worsening liver failure with encephalopathy.
Preoperative laboratory investigations
• FBC and clotting studies: anaemia is contributed to by chronic blood
loss, hypersplenism, haemolysis, chronic illness and malnutrition.
• electrolytes and creatinine: urea is often falsely low due to d hepatic
production. hyponatraemia and hypokalaemia are common. Diuretic
use may exacerbate electrolyte disturbances.
• Glucose: impaired glycogen storage and glucose utilisation.
• LFts.
• hepatitis screening: hepatitis B and C are highly contagious to clinical
staff via parenteral inoculation and universal precautions must be strictly
followed.

--- Page 227 ---

206
206 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
Table 8.3 Surgical risk assessment: Child’s classification, as modified by Pugh
Mortality Minimal (<5%) Modest (5– 50%) Marked (>50%)
Bilirubin (micromoles/ L) <25 25– 40 >40
Albumin (g/ L) >35 30– 35 <30
Pt (s, prolonged) 1– 4 (INr <1.7) 4– 6 (INr 1.7– 2.3) >6 (INr >2.3)
Ascites None Moderate Marked
encephalopathy (see None Grades I and II Grades III
% p. 204) and Iv
Nutrition excellent Good Poor
INr, international normalised ratio; Pt, prothrombin time.
Assessment of liver function
• Serum LFts (table 8.4) are rarely specific, but prothrombin time (Pt),
albumin and bilirubin are sensitive markers of overall liver function.
Serial measurements are useful and indicate trends. Avoid giving fresh
frozen plasma (FFP), unless treating active bleeding, as Pt is an excellent
guide to overall liver function.
• Liver transaminases (aspartate transaminase (ASt), alanine
aminotransferase (ALt)) are sensitive to even mild liver damage and
have no role in mortality prediction. Levels may decrease in severe
disease.
• Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is raised with biliary obstruction.
• Imaging techniques: ultrasound is the main initial investigation of
obstructive jaundice. Other useful investigations include endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (erCP), Ct and magnetic
resonance cholangiography.
• LFts must always be interpreted alongside a careful history and
examination. the liver has a large functional reserve and can often
withstand considerable damage before LFts become deranged.
Preoperative investigations
Cardiac
• eCG is essential as electrolyte abnormalities may precipitate
arrhythmias and alcohol excess may result in AF and cardiomyopathy.
Prolonged corrected Qt is relatively common, and hyperbilirubinaemia
may precipitate bradyarrhythmias.
• echocardiography: cardiomyopathy may develop in association with
causes of CLD, particularly alcohol excess. Pericardial effusions and
diastolic dysfunction also develop in cirrhosis. Smoking is associated
with alcohol excess and is an independent risk factor for CAD.
Respiratory
• CXr
• ABG.

--- Page 228 ---

ANAeSthetIC MANAGeMeNt OF PA tIeNtS WIth LIver DISeASe 207
Table 8.4 Liver function tests
Test Normal range Raised
Bilirubin 2– 17 haemolysis
micromoles/ L Gilbert’s syndrome
Acute and chronic liver failure
Biliary obstruction
ASt 0– 35IU/ L Non- specific (found in liver, heart,
muscle, etc.)
hepatocellular injury
ALt 0– 45IU/ L Specific
hepatocellular injury
Degree of elevation can point to
aetiology:
>1000: acute viral hepatitis, drugs,
autoimmune hepatitis and ischaemia
100– 200: acute viral hepatitis, alcohol and
non- alcoholic fatty liver disease
ALP 30– 120IU/ L Physiological (pregnancy, adolescents,
familial)
Bile duct obstruction (stones, drugs,
cancer)
1° biliary cirrhosis
Metastatic liver disease
Bone disease
γ- glutamyl 0– 30IU/ L Non- specific (found in heart, pancreas
transpeptidase and kidneys)
Alcoholic liver disease
Albumin 40– 60g/ L Non- specific (affected by nutritional status,
catabolism, and urinary and GI losses)
Prognostic in chronic liver disease
Pt and INr 10.9– 12.5s Non- specific (vitamin K deficiency,
(INr 1.0– 1.2) warfarin therapy, disseminated
intravascular coagulation)
however, best prognostic marker in ALF
Nutrition
CLD is associated with a poor nutritional state and predisposes to i inci-
dence of postoperative complications. Preoperative nutrition may help to
reduce this in major elective surgical procedures.
Other
the presence of varices in patients with known liver disease must be es-
tablished, as this is a contraindication for the use of oesophageal Doppler
probes/ tOe and oesophageal temperature probes.

--- Page 229 ---

208
208 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
Perioperative considerations
Premedication
PPIs or h antagonists should be used preoperatively. rSI will further re-
2
duce the risks of gastric aspiration. Sedative medication may precipitate or
worsen encephalopathy.
Monitoring
Standard monitoring should be used, with consideration given to invasive
arterial and CvP monitoring. CvP monitoring is controversial but allows
for centrally administered vasopressors and venous access. Perioperative
haemodynamic instability can worsen hepatic function; MAP should be
maintained within 10– 20% of preoperative levels. hepatic blood flow and
O delivery should be maintained; CO monitoring may be useful, although
2
transthoracic echocardiography or oesophageal Doppler may be contra-
indicated in varices.
Drug effects
even in severe liver disease, the problem is usually one of exaggerated ef-
fects on the CNS, rather than poor liver metabolism. hepatic blood flow is
altered by anaesthetic drugs (e.g. α- and β- agonists/ antagonists), positive
pressure ventilation, PeeP and surgical technique. In most cases, anaesthesia
reduces hepatic blood flow. (See % Drug metabolism and liver disease,
p. 211.) Desflurane best preserves hepatic blood flow, is least metabolised
and has a quicker emergence time, but sevoflurane and isoflurane are also
acceptable volatiles to use.
Regional techniques
Can be useful adjuncts, but neuraxial techniques are contraindicated in the
presence of coagulopathy. Most LAs are metabolised by the liver.
Cardiovascular
Low Svr and arterial pressure, i hr and volume expansion 2° to an acti-
vated renin– angiotensin system seen in both ALF and CLD. vasopressors
may be required; maintain MAP >75mmhg. Portosystemic, pulmonary and
cutaneous shunting (spider angiomata) contributes to a hyperdynamic, high
CO state, often i by up to 50%. Alcohol excess is associated with car-
diomyopathy; cirrhosis is associated with a high incidence of cardiac dys-
function (‘cirrhotic cardiomyopathy’), and concurrent smoking is a risk
factor for CAD. Preoperative assessment, including echo, where indicated.
Propranolol to reduce portal pressures.
Respiratory
hypoxia is common and multifactorial in CLD. Ascites causes splinting of
the diaphragm, basal atelectasis and collapse. excess PeeP will increase
hepatic venous pressure and ICP. tense ascites may affect respiratory
mechanics; consider percutaneous drainage.
Pulmonary hypertension
Consider echo if suspicion of pulmonary hypertension (see % pp. 139–44).
Encephalopathy
this may be precipitated by sedatives, GI bleeding, infection, surgical op-
erations, trauma, hypokalaemia, constipation or acute severe liver failure.

--- Page 230 ---

ANAeSthetIC MANAGeMeNt OF PA tIeNtS WIth LIver DISeASe 209
Coagulopathy
very common in liver disease; t he liver synthesises all clotting factors,
except factor vIII. Coagulopathy is attributed to several mechanisms (d
synthesis of clotting factors and clearance of activated clotting factors,
quantitative and qualitative platelet abnormalities and hyperfibrinolysis).
Consider vitamin K. reversal of coagulopathy with FFP, cryoprecipitate and
platelets directed by thromboelastography (teG®)or similar point- of- care
testing (POCt). ensure adequate provision is made for cross (X)- matched
blood and clotting products.
Renal
CO monitoring/ goal- directed fluid therapy (GDFt) may be useful. tense
ascites may impair renal blood flow and give a falsely high CvP. Avoid hypo-
tension and nephrotoxic drugs, and aim for urine output >1mL/k g/ h.
Portal hypertension
Use of oesophageal Doppler/ tOe/ oesophageal temperature probes is
contraindicated. treatment with β- blockers may contribute to periopera-
tive hypotension. A low CvP may reduce the risk of variceal or GI bleeding.
Ascites
Consider draining preoperatively as hypotension, hypoventilation and as-
piration are all i with tense ascites.
Hypoglycaemia
Patients with liver disease have impaired hepatic glycogen storage and are
prone to hypoglycaemia. Check blood glucose levels regularly. Give 10%
glucose infusions if <2mmol/ L, and monitor plasma K+.
Immune function
Infections of the respiratory and urinary tracts are common. In the pres-
ence of ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis may cause significant
sepsis— have a low index of suspicion. Intraoperative antibiotic prophylaxis
should be given where indicated.
Fluid resuscitation
Sodium chloride 0.9% is recommended 1st line, and sodium bicarbonate
may be considered if significant acidosis. Addition of glucose- containing
fluids if hypoglycaemic. Caution is required as over-r esuscitation with crys-
talloid may worsen cerebral oedema.
Other considerations
IM and SC injections risk haematoma formation if coagulopathic or
thrombocytopenic. Care with positioning; the skin may be fragile. Muscle
wasting may leave patients prone to neuropraxia and pressure damage.
Postoperative considerations
• Patients with advanced liver disease will need postoperative intensive
care or high dependency care.
• Postoperative decompensation of CLD carries a high mortality.
• Constipating analgesics, such as opioids, should be prescribed with
concurrent lactulose to prevent encephalopathy.
• Postoperative ileus may also precipitate encephalopathy in cirrhotic patients.
• Complications include delayed wound healing, sepsis, renal impairment
and bleeding.

--- Page 231 ---

201
210 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
• Fluid balance should be carefully monitored postoperatively, aiming for
a urine output of 1mL/ kg/h .
• Coagulopathy increases the risk of postoperative bleeding and
haematoma formation.
Specific considerations for ALF
H Active acute hepatitis is a contraindication to elective surgery. Due to high
perioperative mortality, patients should have all surgery postponed (unless
a true emergency) until at least 30d after LFts have returned to normal.
• Care is largely supportive, with specific treatments depending on
underlying cause (acetylcysteine infusion in paracetamol overdose,
delivery of fetus if pregnancy- related, penicillin for Amanita phalloides,
chelating agents and/ or haemodialysis in iron overdose, protease
inhibitors in acute hepatitis B infection, aciclovir in herpes simplex virus
infection and corticosteroids in autoimmune hepatitis).
• Coagulation: reversal of coagulopathy should not be routinely carried
out, as Pt provides a surrogate marker of hepatic function. reversal is
indicated for invasive procedures or active bleeding.
• Management may be best delivered in an ICU/ hDU environment. the
presence of grade II encephalopathy or worse should prompt ICU review.
• Patients with encephalopathy, deteriorating INr, hypoglycaemia or
acidosis should be discussed urgently with a hepatologist in a specialist
liver unit (for King’s College criteria for liver transplant, see Box 8.2).
• Orthotopic liver transplantation may be the definitive treatment in some
severe cases. Spontaneous recovery is only seen in around 40% of cases.
Box 8.2 King’s College criteria for transplant referral in
acute liver disease
Paracetamol
• Arterial ph <7.25 following volume resuscitation >24h post-
overdose (OD)
Or
• Serum lactate >3.5 following volume resuscitation >12h post-O D
Or
• Serum lactate >2.5 following volume resuscitation >24h post-O D
Or ALL of the following:
• Grade III–I v encephalopathy
• Creatinine >300 micromoles/ L
• Pt >100s
(or two of the above with non-s eptic deterioration in organ function, e.g.
vasopressors, increasing FiO)
2
Non- paracetamol
• Pt >100s
Or
• Presence of encephalopathy AND any three of the following:
• Age <10 or >40y
• Pt >50s
• Bilirubin >300 micromoles/ L
• Duration of jaundice before encephalopathy >7d
• Aetiology: non- A, non- B hepatitis, drug reaction
Source: data from O’Grady JG et al. early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure,
Gastroenterology, 1989;97(2):439–45.

--- Page 232 ---

DrUG MetABOLISM AND LIver DISeASe 211
Drug metabolism and liver disease
• the vast majority of drugs, including anaesthetic drugs, are metabolised
by the liver (table 8.5).
• Most drugs are initially metabolised by the cytochrome P450 system.
In phase I, they are either oxidised or reduced, and in phase II, they are
conjugated with a glucuronide, glycine or sulphate to enhance water
solubility and excretion in bile or urine.
• In early alcoholic liver disease, the cytochrome P450 system is often
induced, leading to rapid metabolism of drugs, whereas this is reversed
in end- stage disease.
• the liver has a large functional reserve, so these functions are usually
preserved until end- stage disease.
• Pharmacodynamics and the sensitivity of target organs for sedatives and
anaesthetics may be altered, with coma easily induced in end-s tage liver
disease.
• d portal blood flow in hepatic fibrosis reduces 1st- pass metabolism.
• hypoalbuminaemia increases free drug in plasma.
• there is an i volume of distribution due to ascites and Na+/ water
retention.
• Biotransformation enzymes may increase or decrease activity.
• reduced liver cell mass results in reduced enzyme synthesis (e.g. plasma
cholinesterase) activation or deactivation.
• d biliary excretion of drugs due to obstructive jaundice.
Table 8.5 Anaesthetic drugs in liver failure
Drugs safe in liver Drugs to be used with Drugs
failure caution (may need contraindicated in
reduced dosage) liver failure
Premedication Lorazepam Midazolam, diazepam
Induction Propofol,
thiopental,
etomidate
Maintenance Desflurane, enflurane halothane
sevoflurane, (possibly)*
isoflurane, NO
2
Muscle Atracurium, rocuronium,
relaxants cisatracurium vecuronium,
suxamethonium
Opioids remifentanil Fentanyl, alfentanil,
morphine, pethidine
Analgesics Paracetamol NSAIDs, lidocaine,
bupivacaine
* halothane has been rarely reported to cause hepatitis (see % p. 213).

--- Page 233 ---

221
212 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
Postoperative liver dysfunction or
jaundice
Postoperative jaundice is relatively common; haematoma reabsorption or
blood transfusion can result in a high bilirubin load. Significant liver dysfunc-
tion is uncommon in previously healthy patients.
Mild elevation of liver transaminases has a varied aetiology and often re-
solves without treatment. LFts more than double the normal range suggest
hepatocellular injury. hepatitis due to volatile agents is extremely rare, es-
pecially with newer agents, and is largely a diagnosis of exclusion.
• Common causes include reduced hepatic O delivery 2° to hypoxia or
2
hypotension, drugs, trauma or infective causes (table 8.6).
• Benign postoperative intrahepatic cholestasis mimics biliary obstruction
and usually occurs after major abdominal surgery.
Table 8.6 Causes of postoperative liver dysfunction or jaundice
Bilirubin overload Blood transfusion
(haemolysis) haematoma resorption
haemolytic anaemia (sickle- cell, prosthetic heart valve,
glucose- 6- phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency)
hepatocellular injury exacerbation of pre- existing liver disease
hepatic ischaemia: hypovolaemia, hypotension, cardiac
failure
Septicaemia
Drug- induced (antibiotics, halothane)
hypoxia
viral hepatitis
Cholestasis Intrahepatic (benign, infection, drug- induced, e.g.
cephalosporins, carbamazepine, erythromycin)
extrahepatic (pancreatitis, gallstones, bile duct injury)
Congenital Gilbert’s syndrome
Halothane hepatitis
the use of halothane has been largely superseded by other volatile agents,
so it is becoming a historical phenomenon. halothane has been linked to
postoperative liver dysfunction. two syndromes are recognised:
• the first is associated with a transient rise in LFts and low morbidity,
often after initial exposure.
• the second is thought to occur after repeated exposure and has an
‘immune’ mechanism with the development of fulminant hepatic
failure and high mortality. It is rare, with an incidence of 1 in 35 000
anaesthetics.
• Antibodies specific to fulminant hepatic failure patients exposed to
halothane are found in 70% of such patients. It is postulated that a
halothane oxidative metabolite binds to liver cytochromes to form a
hapten and induces a hypersensitivity reaction. All patients exposed to
halothane have altered liver proteins, but it is unknown why only a few
develop liver failure.

--- Page 234 ---

POStOPerAtIve LIver DySFUNCtION Or JAUNDICe 213
Other inhalational anaesthetic agents
• the chance of an ‘immune’ reaction to a volatile agent occurring is
thought to relate to the amount it is metabolised. halothane is 20%
metabolised, enflurane 2% and isoflurane 0.2%. Products of enflurane
metabolism have been shown to alter liver proteins and there have
been rare case reports linking enflurane with liver damage. there is a
theoretical basis for crossreactivity with previous halothane exposure.
Isoflurane is considered safe for use in patients at risk of hepatic failure,
as are sevoflurane and desflurane.
Intravenous fluids in liver disease
• It is important to maintain adequate peri- and postoperative hydration,
as there is a high risk of AKI.
• Glucose 5% or 10% is unsuitable as a resuscitation or maintenance
fluid, as it provides little intravascular volume replacement and may
exacerbate hyponatraemia and cerebral oedema. It is useful in the
correction of hypoglycaemia.
• Sodium chloride 0.9% or hartmann’s solution are both good choices of
crystalloid, although hartmann’s may present an external lactate load
and the high Na+ load in 0.9% sodium chloride may worsen ascites.
• human albumin solution (hAS) 4.5% is a useful colloid, especially if
synthetic liver function is impaired and serum albumin is low.
• If oliguria persists despite adequate fluid resuscitation, Iv terlipressin
0.5– 2mg Iv qds, in conjunction with daily hAS, may improve renal
function.
• Perioperative removal of ascites will result in postoperative
reaccumulation. this should be accounted for in the fluid balance.

--- Page 235 ---

241
214 ChAPter 8 Hepatic disease
Further reading
hickman L, tanner L, Christein J, et al. (2019). Non-h epatic abdominal surgery in patients with cir-
rhotic liver disease. Gastrointest Surg, 23, 634.
Northup PG, Friedman LS, Kamath PS (2019). AGA clinical practice update on surgical risk as-
sessment and perioperative management in cirrhosis: expert review. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol,
17, 595.
hernaez r, Solà e, Moreau r, et al. (2017). Acute- on- chronic liver failure: an update. Gut, 66, 541– 53.
Machicao vI, Balakrishnan M, Fallon MB (2014). Pulmonary complications in chronic liver disease.
Hepatology, 59, 1627– 37.
Lee WM, Stravitz rt, Larson AM (2012). Introduction to the revised American Association for the
Study of Liver Diseases Position Paper on acute liver failure 2011. Hepatology, 55, 965.
Argo CK, Balogun rA (2009). Blood products, volume control, and renal support in the coagulopathy
of liver disease. Clin Liver Dis, 13, 73.
trotter JF (2009). Practical management of acute liver failure on ItU. Curr Opin Crit Care, 15, 163– 7.