# Chapter 9: Endocrine and Metabolic Disease

## 內分泌與代謝疾病


--- Page 236 ---

Chapter 9 215
Endocrine and metabolic
disease
Joanna Poole and Hannah Blanshard
Diabetes mellitus 216
Acromegaly 222
Thyroid disease 223
Parathyroid disorders 226
Adrenocortical insufficiency 228
The patient on steroids 230
Cushing’s syndrome 232
Conn’s syndrome 233
Apudomas 235
Hypokalaemia 238
Hyperkalaemia 240
Hyponatraemia 242
Hypernatraemia 244
See also:
% Endocrine surgery pp. 709–21

--- Page 237 ---

261
216 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Diabetes mellitus
Insulin is necessary, even when fasting, to maintain glucose homeostasis and
balance stress hormones (e.g. adrenaline). It has two classes of action:
• Excitatory: stimulating glucose uptake and lipid synthesis
• Inhibitory (physiologically more important): inhibits lipolysis, proteolysis,
glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis.
Lack of insulin is associated with hyperglycaemia, osmotic diuresis, dehy-
dration, hyperosmolarity, hyperviscosity predisposing to thrombosis and
i rates of wound infection. Sustained hyperglycaemia is associated with
i mortality, hospital stay and complication rates.
DM is present in 10– 15% of the surgical population.
• Type 1 diabetes (20%): immune-m ediated and leads to absolute
insulin deficiency. Patients cannot tolerate prolonged periods without
exogenous insulin. Glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis occur, resulting
in hyperglycaemia and ketosis. Treatment is with insulin.
• Type 2 diabetes (80%): a disease of adult onset, associated with
insulin resistance. Patients produce some endogenous insulin and their
metabolic state often improves with fasting. Treatment may be diet
control, oral hypoglycaemics and/ or insulin.
General considerations
Many diabetic patients are well informed about their condition and have
undergone previous surgery; discuss management with them. Hospital dia-
betes teams can be useful for advice. The overall aims of perioperative
diabetic management are to maintain physiological glucose levels (above
hypoglycaemic levels, but below those at which deleterious effects of
hyperglycaemia become evident) and prevent hypokalaemia, hypomagnes-
aemia and hypophosphataemia.
Preoperative assessment
• CVS: IHD (sometimes asymptomatic), cerebrovascular disease, MI and
cardiomyopathy are all associated with DM. Autonomic neuropathy can
lead to tachy- or bradycardia and postural hypotension.
• renal: 40% of diabetics develop microalbuminuria, which is associated
with hypertension, IHD and retinopathy. This may be reduced by
treatment with ACE inhibitors.
• respiratory: perioperative chest infections are more common,
especially if other risk factors such as smoking and obesity.
• Airway: thickening of soft tissues (glycosylation) occurs, especially in
ligaments around joints, leading to limited joint mobility syndrome.
Intubation may be difficult if the neck is affected or there is insufficient
mouth opening.
• GI: 50% of patients have delayed gastric emptying ± reflux.
• i risk of wound infection.
• Peripheral neuropathy is common; document any existing sensory loss if
regional technique planned.

--- Page 238 ---

DIAbETES MELLITuS 217
Investigations
• Measure glycosylated Hb (HbA1c), a measure of recent glycaemic
control (normal 20–4 8mmol/ mol, 4– 6.5%). If HbA1c is >69mmol/ mol
(8.5%), refer to the team that manages their diabetes for optimisation.
Surgery may then proceed with caution. A value >85mmol/m ol (10%)
suggests inadequate control. refer to the diabetes team, and only
proceed if surgery is urgent or if they feel the patient’s control is as
good as it can be.
• Patients with hypoglycaemic unawareness should be referred to the
diabetes specialist team, irrespective of HbA1c.
Preoperative management
• Make an individualised diabetes management plan, agreed with the
patient, for the preadmission and perioperative period.
• Place the patient 1st on the operating list, if possible.
• Individuals with type 1 diabetes should NEVEr go without insulin, as
they are at risk of diabetic ketoacidosis.
• The Enhanced recovery Partnership Programme recommends high-
carbohydrate drinks prior to surgery. This may compromise blood
sugar control and is not recommended for people with insulin-t reated
diabetes.
• Patients with a planned short starvation period (no more than one
missed meal in total) should be managed by modification of their usual
diabetes regime, avoiding a variable- rate IV insulin infusion (VrIII)
wherever possible.
• Patients expected to miss >1 meal should have a VrIII.
• For suggested perioperative management of insulin, see Table 9.1.
For suggested perioperative management of non-i nsulin diabetic
medication, see Table 9.2.
Perioperative management
• Monitor blood glucose on admission, and hourly during the day of
surgery. Aim for blood glucose level of 6– 10mmol/ L; 4– 12mmol/ L is
acceptable.
• If blood glucose is >12mmol/ L either pre- or post- surgery, check
capillary blood ketones or urinary ketones. If capillary blood ketones
are >3mmol/ L or urinary ketones > +++, cancel surgery.
• Consider an rSI if gastric stasis is suspected.
• regional techniques may be useful for extremity surgery and to reduce
the risk of undetected hypoglycaemia.
• Autonomic dysfunction may exacerbate the hypotensive effect of
spinals and epidurals.
Patients undergoing surgery with a long starvation period
(i.e. two or more missed meals)
• A number of glucose, K+ and insulin regimes have been described
in the past (e.g. Alberti), but the VrIII is widely used and should be
commenced on admission.
• If the patient is already on a long- acting insulin analogue, this should be
continued at 80% the usual dose, even if planning to use a VrIII through
the perioperative period.

--- Page 239 ---

281
218 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Table 9.1 Perioperative management of insulin therapy when no more than one
missed meal
Morning surgery Afternoon surgery
Always check blood glucose on admission
Once daily in evening reduce the night before by reduce the night before
20% by 20%
Once daily in morning reduce by 20% on day before reduce by 20% on day
surgery AND on day of before surgery AND
surgery on day of surgery
Twice daily: one Halve the usual morning dose Halve the usual
injection twice a morning dose
day, i.e. biphasic or
ultralong acting
Twice daily: two Calculate total dose of Calculate total dose of
injections twice a morning insulin(s); give half as morning insulin(s); give
day, i.e. short and intermediate acting only in the half as intermediate
intermediate acting morning acting only in the
morning
3– 5 injections daily basal bolus regimens: omit Give usual morning
morning and lunchtime insulin dose(s); omit
short- acting insulins; keep lunchtime dose
basal unchanged
Premixed morning insulin:
halve morning dose and
omit lunchtime dose
Source: data from barker P et al. (2015) Peri- operative management of the surgical patient with
diabetes. Anaesthesia, 70, 1427– 40.
• Glucose/i nsulin infusions should be administered through the same
cannula to prevent accidental administration of insulin without glucose.
both infusions should be regulated by volumetric pumps, with an
antireflux valve on the IV glucose line.
• Hartmann’s solution should be used in preference to 0.9% sodium
chloride in those patients not requiring a VrIII.
• The recommended 1st- choice solution for VrIII is 0.45% sodium
chloride with 5% glucose, and either 0.15% or 0.3% potassium chloride
(KCl); however, this is not always available.
• Glucose 4% and 0.18% sodium chloride; 10% glucose or 5% glucose
are acceptable. Whenever giving hypotonic parenteral fluids, beware
of hyponatraemia. Preferably give 10% glucose at 60mL/h , rather than
5% glucose at 120mL/ h (prevents water overload, particularly in the
elderly).
• If K+ <4.5mmol/ L, add 10mmol KCl to each 500mL bag of glucose.
• Start VrIII using a syringe pump. Adjust according to local guidelines
for VrIII (see example in Table 9.3). Test blood glucose hourly initially.
Patients on >100 units of insulin/d ay will need higher doses of insulin
by infusion.

--- Page 240 ---

DIAbETES MELLITuS 219
Table 9.2 Perioperative management of oral diabetic medication when no more
than one missed meal
Morning surgery Afternoon surgery
Always check blood glucose on admission
Acarbose Omit morning dose if Give morning dose if
NbM eating
Meglitinide Omit morning dose if Give morning dose if
(repaglinide or NbM eating
nateglinide)
Metformin* Take as normal Take as normal
Sulfonylurea Omit morning dose Omit all (whether once
(e.g. glibenclamide, (whether once daily or daily or twice daily)
gliclazide) twice daily)
SGLT- 2 inhibitors Omit Omit
(e.g. dapagliflozin)
Pioglitazone Take as normal Take as normal
DDP- 4 inhibitor Take as normal Take as normal
(e.g. sitagliptin,
vildagliptin, saxagliptin)
GLP- 1 analogue Take as normal Take as normal
(e.g. exenatide, liraglutide)
DPP- 4, dipeptidyl peptidase- 4; GLP- 1, glucagon- like peptide- 1; NbM, nil by mouth; SGLT- 2,
sodium– glucose cotransporter- 2.
* If contrast medium is to be used and estimated GFr <50mL/m in/ 1.732, metformin should be
omitted on the day of surgery and for the following 48h.
Source: data from barker P et al. (2015) Peri- operative management of the surgical patient with
diabetes. Anaesthesia, 70, 1427– 1440.
Table 9.3 VrIII infusion
Blood glucose Initial rate of insulin infusion Insulin infusion rate if blood
(mmol/ L) (units/ h) glucose not <10mmol/ L (units/ h)
<4.0 0.5— if a long- acting insulin has been continued, stop and treat
as for hypoglycaemia
4.1– 7.0 1.0 2.0
7.1– 9.0 2.0 3.0
9.1– 11.0 3.0 4.0
11.1– 14.0 4.0 5.0
14.1– 17.0 5.0 6.0
17.1– 20.0 6.0 8.0
>20 Check infusion running, and seek diabetes team or medical
advice)

--- Page 241 ---

220
220 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Perioperative treatment of hyperglycaemia
For well-c ontrolled patients (HbA1c <69mmol/m ol) undergoing surgery
with a short starvation period (one missed meal) and preoperative hyper-
glycaemia (blood glucose >12mmol/ L):
• Type 1 diabetes: give SC rapid- acting insulin analogue. Assume that
1 unit will drop blood glucose by 3mmol/ L, but take advice from the
patient wherever possible. recheck blood glucose hourly. If surgery
cannot be delayed, commence VrIII.
• Type 2 diabetes: give 0.1 units/ kg of SC rapid- acting insulin analogue,
and recheck blood glucose 1h later to ensure it is falling. If surgery
cannot be delayed or the response is inadequate, commence VrIII.
Hypoglycaemia
• blood glucose <4mmol/L is the main danger to diabetics
perioperatively. Fasting, recent alcohol consumption, liver failure and
septicaemia commonly exacerbate this.
• Characteristic signs are tachycardia, light- headedness, sweating and
pallor. This may progress to confusion, restlessness, incomprehensible
speech, double vision, convulsions and coma. If untreated, permanent
brain damage will occur, made worse by hypotension and hypoxia.
• Anaesthetised patients may not show any of these signs. Monitor
blood sugar preoperatively and then hourly if stable, and suspect
hypoglycaemia with unexplained changes in the patient’s condition.
• If hypoglycaemia occurs, give 75mL of 20% glucose over 15min
or 150mL of 10% glucose, and repeat blood glucose after 15min.
Alternatively, give 1mg of glucagon (IM or IV); 10– 20g (2– 4 teaspoons)
of sugar by mouth or an NGT is an alternative.
Transferring from a variable-r ate intravenous insulin
infusion to subcutaneous insulin or oral treatment
Restarting oral hypoglycaemic medication
• recommence oral hypoglycaemic agents once the patient is ready to
eat and drink.
• be prepared to withhold or reduce sulfonylureas if the food intake is
likely to be reduced.
• Metformin should only be recommenced if the eGFr >50mL/m in/
1.732.
Restarting subcutaneous insulin for patients already established on insulin
• Conversion to SC insulin should be delayed until the patient is able to
eat and drink without nausea and vomiting.
• Should take place when the next meal- related SC insulin dose is due.
• restart the normal presurgical regime. be aware that insulin
requirement may change due to postoperative stress, infection or
altered food intake.
• Consult the diabetes team if blood sugar is outside the acceptable range
(4– 12mmol/ L).
• Ensure overlap between the VrIII and the 1st injection of the fast-a cting
insulin. The fast- acting insulin should be injected SC with the meal, and
the VrIII discontinued 30– 60min later.

--- Page 242 ---

DIAbETES MELLITuS 221
For patients on basal bolus insulin
• If the patient was previously on a long- acting insulin analogue, such as
Lantus® or Levemir®, this should have been continued and so the patient
only needs to restart their normal short- acting insulin at the next meal.
For patients on continuous subcutaneous insulin
• Commence the SC insulin infusion at their normal basal rate as long as
not at bedtime.
• VrIII should be continued until the next meal bolus has been given.
Further reading
barker P, Creasey PE, Dhatariya K, et al.; Association of Anaesthetists of Great britain and Ireland
(2015). Peri- operative management of the surgical patient with diabetes. Anaesthesia, 70,
1427– 40.
Simpson AK, Levy N, Hall GM (2008). Perioperative IV fluids in diabetic patients—d on’t forget the
salt. Anaesthesia, 63, 1043– 5.

--- Page 243 ---

222
222 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Acromegaly
A rare clinical syndrome caused by overproduction of growth hormone
from the anterior pituitary. Patients may present for pituitary surgery (see
% pp. 567–8) or require surgery unrelated to their pituitary pathology.
Preoperative assessment
• Cardiac assessment for hypertension (30%), IHD, cardiomyopathy,
heart failure, conduction defects and valvular disease.
• Possible difficult airway management and intubation due to large
head and tongue, hypertrophy of the larynx and trachea, vocal cord
thickening and strictures and chondrocalcinosis of the larynx. Consider
direct/ indirect laryngoscopy preoperatively if vocal cord or laryngeal
pathology is suspected.
• Enlargement of the thyroid (25%) may compress the trachea.
• Twenty- five per cent of patients have diabetes.
• Snoring and daytime somnolence may indicate sleep apnoea (70%).
Chronic OSA can cause elevated PAP.
• Kyphoscoliosis may worsen respiratory function.
• Medications: somatostatin analogues (octreotide, lanreotide) may cause
vomiting and diarrhoea. bromocriptine, a long-a cting dopamine agonist,
is often used to lower growth hormone levels and can cause severe
postural hypotension.
• Symptoms and signs of raised ICP or nerve compression (e.g. carpal
tunnel syndrome).
Investigations
• ECG as routine. Echocardiogram if patient symptomatic or has
murmurs.
• CXr if cardiorespiratory problems.
• blood glucose.
Conduct of anaesthesia
• Large face masks, long- bladed laryngoscopes and gum elastic
bougies may make airway management and intubation easier. use a
videolaryngoscope (VL) if available. AFOI is the technique of choice
for patients with anticipated difficult intubation. More problems
experienced with extubation than intubation.
• A long table may be required.
• Nerve compression syndromes are common, so take care to protect
vulnerable areas (ulnar nerve at the elbow, median nerve at the wrist,
and common peroneal nerve below the knee).
Further reading
Menon r, Murphy P, Lindley A (2011). Anaesthesia and pituitary disease. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit
Care Pain, 11, 133– 7.
Nemergut EC, Dumont AS, barry uJ, et al. (2005). Perioperative management of patients under-
going transsphenoidal pituitary surgery. Anesth Analg, 101, 1170– 81.

--- Page 244 ---

THyrOID DISEASE 223
Thyroid disease
May present for thyroidectomy (see % pp. 710–13) or non-t hyroid surgery.
General considerations for non- thyroid surgery
Hypothyroidism
• Commonly due to autoimmune thyroid destruction.
• CVS complications include d blood volume, d CO (up to 50%),
bradycardia, hypotension and IHD. Pericardial effusions also occur.
• respiratory muscle weakness, impaired hypoxic/ hypercapnic drive
and OSA.
• Also associated with anaemia, hypoglycaemia, hyponatraemia,
i thrombotic tendency, impaired hepatic drug metabolism and renal
clearance affecting drug clearance.
• reduced gastric motility and i postoperative ileus.
• If clinical evidence of hypothyroidism, delay elective surgery to obtain
a euthyroid state. Liaise with an endocrinologist. Suggest levothyroxine
(T), starting dose 50 micrograms, increasing to 100– 200 micrograms
4
PO over several weeks. The elderly are susceptible to angina and heart
failure after thyroxine replacement due to i cardiac work. Start with
25 micrograms T, and increase by 25 micrograms at 3- to 4- weekly
4
intervals.
• If surgery is urgent, use liothyronine (T), 10– 50 micrograms slow IV
3
injection with ECG monitoring (consider half dose if suspected cardiac
disease).
• Euthyroid sick syndrome refers to suppression of serum thyroid
hormone occurring in euthyroid patients due to concurrent illness.
Subclinical hypothyroidism is a risk factor for postoperative AF, but
there is no clear evidence hormone replacement should be given in this
situation.
• Myxoedema coma is an emergency with mortality of up to 80%.
Presents with confusion, drowsiness, bradycardia, hypotension and
hypothermia. May be precipitated by infection or cold and require IV
thyroxine replacement.
Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis)
• Typically presents with weight loss, hypertension, sweating and cardiac
arrhythmias (especially AF). Treatment is with carbimazole (30–4 5mg
PO daily for 6– 8w). This inhibits iodination of tyrosyl residues in
thyroglobulin. Occasionally, in severe cases with a large thyroid, Lugol’s
iodine is substituted 10d preoperatively to reduce gland vascularity.
• β- blockade is started if there are signs of tremor or palpitations.
Non- cardioselective β- blockers (propranolol 30– 60mg tds) are most
effective. β1- adrenergic blockade treats tachycardia and β2- adrenergic
blockade prevents the peripheral conversion of T to T. Calcium
4 3
channel blockers are an alternative for those with reactive airway
disease.

--- Page 245 ---

224
224 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Preoperative assessment
• Elective surgery should only occur when patient is euthyroid (Hr
<80bpm, no hand tremor). Patients with subclinical hypothyroidism
usually have no anaesthetic problems and no delay is needed.5
• A goitre can cause respiratory obstruction, so look for tracheal
deviation and retrosternal extension. Look for evidence of tracheal
compression with shortness of breath (may be positional), dysphagia
and stridor (occurs with 50% compression). Infiltrating carcinoma may
make any neck movement difficult and is an independent predictor of
difficult intubation.
• SVC obstruction can occur. Look for distended neck veins that do not
change with respiration.
• Check for other autoimmune disorders.
Investigations
(See % pp. 710–11.)
Conduct of anaesthesia
Hypothyroid patients
• Give all drugs slowly. Susceptible to profound hypotension, which may
be relatively resistant to the effects of catecholamine therapy.
• Actively warm as low metabolic rate predisposes to hypothermia.
• Tendency to hypoventilate; controlled ventilation is recommended.
• Drug metabolism is slower, so reduce the dose of relaxants and opioids
and monitor twitch response.
Hyperthyroid patients
• Continue β- blockade to reduce the possibility of a thyroid storm.
• Consider invasive arterial bP monitoring.
Special considerations
Thyroid storm
• A life- threatening exacerbation of the hyperthyroid state, with evidence
of decompensation in one or more organ systems (mortality 20–3 0%).
• usually presents 6–2 4h post- surgery with fever (>40°C), sweating,
sinus tachycardia (>140bpm), coma, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.
• If presents intraoperatively, may be difficult to distinguish from MH.
Higher mixed venous partial pressure of CO and higher creatine kinase
2
(CK) in MH.
• rehydrate with IV 0.9% sodium chloride and glucose.
• Treat hyperthermia with tepid sponging and paracetamol. Do not
give NSAIDs or aspirin, as they displace thyroid hormone from serum
binding sites.
• Give propranolol (1mg increments, up to 10mg), with CVS monitoring,
to decrease the pulse rate to <90bpm. Alternatively, give esmolol
(loading dose 250– 500 micrograms/ kg, followed by 50– 100
micrograms/ kg/ min).
• Give hydrocortisone (200mg IV qds) to treat adrenal insufficiency and
to decrease T release and conversion to T at very high levels.
4 3

--- Page 246 ---

THyrOID DISEASE 225
• Give propylthiouracil (1g loading dose via NGT, followed by 200–3 00mg
qds). This inhibits thyroid hormone release and also decreases the
peripheral conversion of T to T (not immediate).
4 3
• After blockade by propylthiouracil, give sodium iodide (500mg tds IV),
potassium iodide (five drops qds via NGT) or Lugol’s iodine (5–1 0
drops qds via NGT).
Hypothyroid coma
• A rare form of decompensated hypothyroidism (mortality 15–2 0%),
precipitated by infection, trauma, cold and CNS depressants.
• Characterised by coma, hypoventilation, bradycardia, hypotension and
severe dilutional hyponatraemia.
• rehydrate with IV glucose and 0.9% sodium chloride.
• May require cardiorespiratory stabilisation and ventilation.
• Warm slowly. Sudden warming may lead to extreme peripheral
vasodilation.
• Give stress-d ose steroids (e.g. hydrocortisone 100mg qds IV), in case
they have concomitant 1° or 2° adrenal insufficiency, a common result
of hypothyroidism.
• Give levothyroxine 200– 400 micrograms IV bolus, followed by 100
micrograms the next day, less in patients with CVS disease. Consider
a combination of IV T and T, particularly if urgent surgery required.
3 4
The conversion of T to T is suppressed in hypothyroid coma, and
4 3
T is more active than T. In hypothyroid coma give 5–20 micrograms
3 4
liothyronine sodium IV, every 12h; can be increased to 5–20
micrograms every 4h if required.
• Transfer to ICu.
Further reading
Palace Mr (2017). Perioperative management of thyroid dysfunction. Health Serv Insights, 10,
1178632916689677.
Manzullo EF, ross DS (2014). Non- thyroid surgery in the patient with thyroid disease. UpToDate. M
http:// www.uptodate.com/ contents/ nonthyroid- surgery- in- the- patient- with- thyroid- disease
bahn rS, burch Hb, Cooper DS, et al. (2011). Hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxi-
cosis: management guidelines of the American Thyroid Association and American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists. Thyroid, 21, 593– 646.

--- Page 247 ---

226
226 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Parathyroid disorders
General considerations
The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH), which acts on
the bones and kidneys to increase serum Ca2+ and decrease serum phos-
phate. It stimulates osteoclasts to release Ca2+ and phosphate into the ECF
and simultaneously increases phosphate excretion and Ca2+ reabsorption in
the kidney. Patients may present for parathyroidectomy (see % pp. 714–15)
and non- parathyroid- related surgery.
Hyperparathyroidism
• 1° hyperthyroidism: usually an adenoma causing high PTH, high
Ca2+ and low phosphate. Associated with familial multiple endocrine
neoplasia (MEN) type 1. Tumours rarely palpable and are located at
surgery. Methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) up to 1mg/k g is
given preoperatively to localise the parathyroid gland.
• Fifty per cent of cases are asymptomatic, and presentation is often
subtle. May present with anorexia, dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting and
constipation, hypertension, shortened QT interval, polydipsia, polyuria,
renal calculi, depression, poor memory and drowsiness.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
• results from compensatory parathyroid hypertrophy due to chronic
low Ca2+. Complicates CKD.
• Parathyroid hyperplasia causes high PTH, normal or low Ca2+ level and
a high phosphate level.
• usually presents as excessive bone resorption (seen earliest in the radial
aspect of the middle phalanx of the 2nd digit) or calcification of the
vascular system, organs and soft tissues.
• Treat medically with dietary phosphate restriction and calcium and
vitamin D supplements. Medical therapy fails in 5–1 0% of patients on
long- term dialysis and surgery becomes necessary.
• risks of surgery are bleeding, recurrent hyperparathyroidism,
hypoparathyroidism and injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves.
Patients should undergo dialysis within 1d of surgery and then 48h
postoperatively or as required.
• Watch for postoperative hypocalcaemia and hypomagnesaemia.
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
• Parathyroid hyperplasia progresses to autonomous secretion, behaving
like an adenoma. Excessive secretion of PTH continues, despite
correction of renal failure. Only a few cases require operation.
Hypercalcaemic crisis
• Occurs most commonly in the elderly with undiagnosed
hyperparathyroidism and with malignant disease. Dehydration
results in anorexia and nausea/ vomiting which exacerbates the cycle.
Characterised by weakness, lethargy, mental changes, abdominal pain
and coma.
• Serum Ca2+ >4.5mmol/ L is life- threatening and can be rapidly, but
transiently lowered with phosphate (500mL of 0.1M neutral solution
over 6– 8h).

--- Page 248 ---

PArATHyrOID DISOrDErS 227
• rehydration is the 1° treatment (4– 6L of fluid often required).
• Pamidronate (60mg in 500mL of 0.9% sodium chloride over 4h) is the
1st- line treatment. bisphosphonates are potent inhibitors of osteoclastic
bone resorption. Effect is rapid and long-l asting.
• Calcitonin, 3– 4u/ kg IV, then 4u/ kg SC bd, causes a rapid, but
temporary decrease in skeletal release of Ca2+ and phosphate.
• The 2nd- line treatment, once volume repletion has been achieved, is
forced 0.9% sodium chloride diuresis with furosemide (40mg IV every
4h). Loop diuretics decrease the proximal tubular resorption of Ca2+.
Consider central pressure monitoring in the elderly at risk of LV failure.
• Hydrocortisone (200– 400mg IV daily) in patients with malignancy.
• Dialysis is reserved for patients with renal failure.
Perioperative plan
(See % p. 715.)
• If serum Ca2+ <3mmol/ L, with no ECG changes or end- organ
impairment, then proceed with the operation.
• If serum Ca2+ >3mmol/ L, ECG is abnormal or CVS or renal
impairment, the operation should be postponed until after treatment.
Hypoparathyroidism
• usually caused by parathyroidectomy, but post-r adiotherapy and
idiopathic cases also occur. Patients with a history of extensive neck
dissection should have serum Ca2+ measured before surgery.
• results in hypocalcaemia (ionised Ca2+ <0.9mmol/ L, corrected
Ca2+ <2.2mmol/ L). Trough level usually occurs at 20h following
parathyroidectomy and normalises by d3.
• Corrected Ca2+ is total Ca2+ corrected to albumin concentration; add
0.1mmol/ L to Ca2+ for each 5g/ L albumin is below 40g/ L.
• The presenting features are due to low Ca2+ levels and manifest as
carpopedal spasm, tetany, dysrhythmia, hypotension and prolonged P– r
interval on ECG.
• Treat with Ca2+ (calcium gluconate 10mL 10% IV over 10min, followed
by 40mL in 1L of 0.9% sodium chloride over 8h).
• Low serum magnesium is also common and can be treated with
magnesium sulfate (1– 5mmol IV slowly).
Further reading
Sasidharan P, Johnston IG (2009). Parathyroid physiology and anaesthesia. Anaesthesia tutorial of the week.
M https:// www.frca.co.uk/ Documents/ 142%20Anaesthesia%20&%20the%20parathyroid%20
gland.pdf

--- Page 249 ---

228
228 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Adrenocortical insufficiency
Primary adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison’s disease)
Destruction of adrenal cortex by autoimmune disease (75%), infection
(tuberculosis (Tb)), septicaemia, acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS), haemorrhage, metastases, and surgery. Associated with gluco-
corticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency.
Secondary adrenocortical insufficiency
Insufficient adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) to stimulate the ad-
renal cortex due to pituitary suppression by exogenous steroids or gen-
eralised hypopituitarism usually from pituitary or hypothalamic tumours.
Associated with glucocorticoid deficiency only.
Clinical features of adrenal insufficiency
Weakness, fatigue (100%), nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, weight loss (60%),
myalgia and joint pain. Some features more pronounced or found only in
Addison’s disease: skin hyperpigmentation (90%), postural hypotension
(90%) and salt craving. Skin pallor found only in 2° insufficiency.
Acute adrenal crisis
Medical emergency characterised by dizziness, weakness, sweating, abdom-
inal pain, nausea and vomiting or coma.
Causes may be inadequate stress-r elated steroid replacement in patients
with chronic adrenal insufficiency, adrenal haemorrhage or pituitary apo-
plexy (apoplexy is defined as a sudden neurological impairment, usually due
to a vascular process, i.e. infarction or haemorrhage).
Investigations
• Serum shows: low glucose, low Na+ (90%) and raised K+ (70%). Ca2+,
urea and creatinine are raised in Addison’s disease only.
• Table 9.4 shows biochemical diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
Treatment
• Hydrocortisone, 20mg in the morning and 10mg at night PO.
• Fludrocortisone, 0.1mg PO, to replace aldosterone in Addison’s disease.
Perioperative management of patients with Addison’s
disease
• Joint care with an endocrinologist is advisable.
• Give all medication on the morning of surgery.
• For any nil- by- mouth regime, give IV 0.9% sodium chloride to prevent
dehydration and maintain mineralocorticoid stability.
• Hydrocortisone 100mg before surgery, then continuous infusion at rate
of 200mg/ 24h intraoperatively. Postoperatively, the infusion can be
reduced to 100mg/ 24h infusion or give 50mg 6- hourly.
• Once eating and drinking, start double normal dose for 48h, extended
to 1w if recovery complicated.
• It is worth noting that 20mg hydrocortisone is equivalent to 0.05mg
fludrocortisone, so with hydrocortisone doses of 50mg or more,
mineralocorticoid replacement in 1° adrenal insufficiency can be reduced.
• If any postoperative complications arise, e.g. fever, delay the return to
normal dose.
• Four- hourly blood glucose and daily electrolytes.

--- Page 250 ---

ADrENOCOrTICAL INSuFFICIENCy 229
Table 9.4 biochemical diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency
Test Normal range Definite adrenal insufficiency
1° 2°
Early morning 165– 680nmol/ L Cortisol <165nmol/ L and Cortisol
cortisol ACTH >22.0pmol/ L <100nmol/ L
Early morning 1.1– 11.0pmol/ L Not diagnostic
ACTH
Standard short Peak cortisol Peak cortisol <500nmol/ L Peak cortisol
Synacthen® test* >500nmol/ L <500nmol/ L
Insulin Peak cortisol Peak cortisol
tolerance test** >500nmol/ L <500nmol/ L
* Serum cortisol at 0 and 30min after 250 micrograms of Synacthen® IV.
** Serum glucose and cortisol at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60 and 90min after insulin (0.1–0 .15 units/ kg IV).
Test only valid if symptomatic hypoglycaemia (serum glucose <2.2mmol/L ) is achieved. Gold
standard test— close supervision mandatory.
Adrenal crisis (Addisonian crisis)
• Classically presents as hypotension, hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and
hypoglycaemia with abdominal pain.
• Can resemble hypovolaemic shock but can also mimic septic shock with
fever, peripheral vasodilation and high CO.
• In patients with type 1 diabetes, deterioration of glycaemic control with
recurrent hypoglycaemia can be a presenting sign of a crisis.
• O 100% and ventilatory support if necessary. refer to ICu/ HDu.
2
• IV fluids to restore blood volume, 0.9% sodium chloride to replace Na+
deficit initially at 1000mL/ h and glucose for hypoglycaemia.
• baseline cortisol and ACTH prior to hydrocortisone.
• Hydrocortisone 200mg, followed by 100mg qds. If given IV, no faster
than 10mg/ min to avoid vascular damage.
• Dexamethasone 4mg IV can be given if the diagnosis has not been
confirmed, since this does not interfere with the measurement of
cortisol and ACTH stimulation testing.
• Vasopressor resistance may occur before steroid replacement.
• Treat the precipitating cause.
Relative adrenal insufficiency in the critically ill
• relative hypoadrenalism in ICu patients occurs in 730– 50% of septic
patients. Consider in patients with increasing inotrope/v asopressor
requirements or prolonged mechanical ventilation. Treat with 200mg
hydrocortisone IV.
• Abnormal short Synacthen® test is a poor prognostic indicator.
Further reading
Wass J, Howlett T, Arlt W, et al. (2017). Surgical guidelines for Addison’s disease and other forms of
adrenal insufficiency. Addison’s Disease Self-H elp Group Surgical Guidelines, A5. M https:// www.
addisonsdisease.org.uk/ surgery
bornstein Sr, Allolio b, Arlt W, et al. (2016). Diagnosis and treatment of primary adrenal insuffi-
ciency: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 101, 364– 89.

--- Page 251 ---

230
230 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
The patient on steroids
Steroids are commonly used to suppress inflammatory and immunological
responses, as well as in treatment of adrenocortical insufficiency. These
patients may develop perioperative complications from their underlying
disease or from a potentially impaired stress response due to hypothalamic–
pituitary– adrenal (HPA) suppression. recent research suggests that small,
physiological replacement doses are adequate. Table 9.5 shows the AoA
guidance on recommended doses for intra- and postoperative steroid
cover in adults receiving adrenosuppressive doses of steroids (equivalent
to ≥5mg prednisolone).
Table 9.5 AoA guidelines on adult glucocorticoid replacement (2020)
Intraoperative Postoperative
Major 100mg hydrocortisone at reduce infusion rate by
surgery and induction, then initiate infusion at 50% and normal dose
CS rate 200mg/ 24h. Alternatively, when eating
6– 8mg dexamethasone at Complicated recovery:
induction will suffice for 24h continue double normal
dose for 2– 7d or until
complications resolve
body As above Double regular dose for 2d
surface +
intermediate
surgery
bowel HPA suppression possible: Double normal dose for 24h
procedures IV fluids + 100mg
hydrocortisone IV for bowel
prep and induction
HPA suppression unlikely:
continue normal dose
(equivalent IV dose if nil by
mouth)
Labour Hydrocortisone 100mg IV at
onset of labour, followed by
infusion at rate 200mg/ 24h
Source: data from Woodcock, T et al. (2020) Guidelines for the management of glucocorticoids
during the peri- operative period for patients with adrenal insufficiency. Anaesthesia, 75:654– 63.
Hypothalamic–p ituitary– adrenal suppression
• Endogenous cortisol (hydrocortisone) production is of the order of
25– 30mg/ 24h (following a circadian pattern). During stress induced by
major surgery, it rises to 75– 100mg/ d and can remain elevated for a
variable period of time (up to 72h following cardiac surgery).
• Prednisolone is a synthetic glucocorticoid with the general properties of
corticosteroids. Prednisolone exceeds hydrocortisone in glucocorticoid
and anti- inflammatory activity, being 3– 4 times more potent on a
weight basis than the parent hormone; however, it is less active than

--- Page 252 ---

THE PATIENT ON STErOIDS 231
hydrocortisone in mineralocorticoid activity. It is often given PO for
chronic conditions to limit water retention. In contrast, hydrocortisone
can be given IV or PO, making it suitable for use perioperatively (for
conversion, see box 9.1). Its high mineralocorticoid activity and resulting
fluid retention make it unsuitable for chronic disease suppression.
• Fludrocortisone is available only in the oral preparation. It may be
withheld on the day of surgery and while the patient is receiving stress
doses of hydrocortisone.
• Low- dose steroid treatment (<10mg prednisolone per day) usually
carries little danger of HPA suppression.
• HPA suppression may occur after PO, topical, parenteral, nebulised and
inhaled routes (e.g. 1500 micrograms/ d beclometasone).
• HPA suppression can be measured using various methods. In practice,
the short Synacthen® (corticotropin) test is reliable and cheap.
• Patients are given 250 micrograms IV Synacthen® (synthetic
corticotropin), and serum cortisol is measured at 0, 30 and 60min.
Normal peak cortisol (420– 700nmol/ L) indicate the ability of the
patient to mount a stress response. Insulin tolerance tests can be
performed under the supervision of an endocrinologist, for equivocal
results.
Box 9.1 Steroid equivalence
Prednisolone 5mg equivalent to: Hydrocortisone 20mg
Methylprednisolone 4mg
betamethasone 750 micrograms
Dexamethasone 750 micrograms
Cortisone acetate 25mg
Deflazacort 6mg
Triamcinolone 4mg
Further reading
Woodcock T, barker P, Daniel S, et al. (2020). Guidelines for the management of glucocorticoids
during the peri- operative period for patients with adrenal insufficiency. Anaesthesia, 75, 654– 63.
Liu MM, reidy Ab, Saatee S, et al. (2017). Perioperative steroid management: approaches based on
current evidence. Anesthesiology, 127, 166– 72.

--- Page 253 ---

232
232 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Cushing’s syndrome
Cushing’s syndrome describes excess plasma cortisol. Commonly caused
by overtreatment with steroids. The 2nd commonest cause is a pituitary ad-
enoma (Cushing’s disease). Ectopic ACTH (e.g. oat cell carcinoma of lung),
adrenal adenoma and adrenal carcinoma are also possible causes.
Clinical features
• round ‘moon’ face, truncal obesity, bruised and fragile skin
• Proximal myopathy and osteoporosis
• High Na+, bicarbonate (HCO– ) and glucose; low K+ and Ca2+.
3
Diagnosis
• High plasma cortisol with loss of diurnal variation (peak 6 a.m., trough
midnight). Normal cortisol range 7140– 700nmol/ L dependent on time
of day and clinical context.
• i urinary 17- (OH)- steroids.
• Loss of suppression with dexamethasone 2mg.
• ACTH level high with ectopic ACTH, normal/ high in pituitary disease
and low with adrenal disease or ectopic cortisol administration.
Preoperative assessment
• Many patients have ECG abnormalities (high- voltage QrS and inverted
T waves), which may make IHD difficult to exclude. These will revert to
normal after curative surgery.
• Eighty- five per cent of patients are hypertensive, often poorly
controlled, and LVH should be looked for.
• Sleep apnoea and gastro- oesophageal reflux are common and difficult
intubation should be anticipated if facial adipose tissue i.
• Sixty per cent of patients have diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance
and a VrIII may be appropriate (see % p. 219).
• Obesity may make venous access difficult.
• Patients are at risk of peptic ulcer disease, so give prophylactic antacid
medication.
Conduct of anaesthesia
• Position the patient carefully intraoperatively due to i risk of pressure
sores and fractures 2° to fragile skin and osteoporosis.
Further reading
Nieman LK, biller bMK, Findling JW, et al. (2015). Treatment of Cushing’s syndrome: an Endocrine
society clinical guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 100, 2807– 31.
Domi r (2011). Cushing's surgery: role of the anesthesiologist. Indian J Endocrinol Metab, 15, 322– 8.

--- Page 254 ---

CONN’S SyNDrOME 233
Conn’s syndrome
Excess of aldosterone produced from an adenoma (60%) or benign hyper-
plasia of the adrenal gland (35– 40%) or an adrenal carcinoma (rare).
General considerations
Aldosterone promotes active reabsorption of Na+ and excretion of K+
through the renal tubules. Water is retained with Na+, resulting in an in-
crease in ECF volume. To a lesser extent, there is also tubular secretion of
H+ ions and Mg2+, resulting in a metabolic alkalosis.
Clinical features
• refractory hypertension, hypervolaemia, metabolic alkalosis.
• Spontaneous hypokalaemia (K+ <3.5mmol/ L); moderately severe
hypokalaemia (K+ <3.0mmol/ L) during diuretic therapy despite PO K+.
• Muscle weakness, especially in ethnic Chinese, 2° to hypokalaemia.
• Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 2° to renal tubular damage.
• Impaired glucose tolerance in 750% of patients.
Preoperative assessment for adrenalectomy
• Spironolactone, a competitive aldosterone antagonist, is given
to reverse the metabolic and electrolyte effects and restore
normovolaemia. Doses of up to 400mg/ d may be required.
• The patient should have normal serum K+ and HCO– if possible.
3
• Hypertension is usually mild and well controlled on spironolactone.
• Calcium channel blockers, such as nifedipine, are effective
antihypertensive agents with aldosterone- secreting adenomas.
Investigations
• Aldosterone (pg/ mL) to renin (nanograms/ mL/ h) ratio >400.
• 2° hyperaldosteronism: raised serum aldosterone, but normal ratio.
• Important to distinguish between adenoma and hyperplasia as adenoma
is usually treated surgically and hyperplasia medically.
• Adrenal vein sampling, radiolabelling, CT and MrI are all used.
Conduct of anaesthesia for adrenalectomy
unilateral adrenalectomy should ideally be performed laparoscopically.
Handling of the adrenal gland during surgery can cause CVS instability but is
not as severe as with a phaeochromocytoma (see % pp. 716–19).
• A short- acting α- blocker should be available (phentolamine 1mg
boluses IV).
• Check blood glucose perioperatively.
• Chronic hypokalaemia has an antagonistic action upon insulin secretion/
release and may result in abnormal glucose tolerance with the stress of
surgery.
Postoperative care
• K+ supplements and spironolactone should be discontinued
postoperatively.
• Give hydrocortisone IV postoperatively until the patient can tolerate
oral hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone.
• Hypertension may persist after removal of the adenoma, presumably
due to permanent changes in vascular resistance.

--- Page 255 ---

234
234 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Management of patients with Conn’s syndrome for non-
adrenal surgery
Such patients usually have bilateral hyperplasia of the zona glomerulosa.
Hypertension is usually more severe and may require additional therapy
(ACE inhibitors are useful). Try to restore K+ to normal value preopera-
tively. Perform CVS assessment as for any hypertensive patient.
Further reading
Funder JW, Carey rM, Mantero F, et al. (2016). The management of primary aldosteronism: case de-
tection, diagnosis and treatment: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab, 101, 1889– 916.

--- Page 256 ---

APuDOMAS 235
Apudomas
Tumours of amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APuD) cells
which are present in the anterior pituitary gland, thyroid, adrenal me-
dulla, GI tract, pancreatic islets, carotid bodies and lungs. Apudomas in-
clude phaeochromocytoma, carcinoid tumour, gastrinoma, VIPomas and
insulinoma and may occur as part of the MEN syndrome. In 2017, the
European Neuroendocrine Society released guidance on perioperative
management of neuroendocrine tumours.1
Phaeochromocytoma
(See % pp. 716–19.)
Carcinoid tumours
• Carcinoid tumours are derived from argentaffin cells and produce
peptides and amines. They occur in the GI tract (75%), bronchus,
pancreas and gonads. Mainly benign, but of those that are malignant,
only about a quarter release vasoactive substances into the systemic
circulation, leading to the carcinoid syndrome.
• Mediators are metabolised in the liver; carcinoid syndrome thus
occurs if: (1) liver metastasis; (2) tumour drainage bypasses the portal
circulation; and (3) precursors are so copious they overwhelm hepatic
enzyme capacity, e.g. high lymph node metastasis burden.
• Niacin deficiency or pellagra can occur due to the consumption of
niacin in serotonin production.
• Vasoactive substances include serotonin, bradykinin, histamine,
substance P, prostaglandins and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).
• Patients with an asymptomatic carcinoid tumour have simple carcinoid
disease and do not present particular anaesthetic difficulties.
• Patients with carcinoid syndrome can be extremely difficult to manage
perioperatively.
• Symptoms such as flushing (multiple episodes a day) are predictive of
sequelae such as carcinoid heart disease.
Carcinoid syndrome
• Affects about 10% of patients with carcinoid tumours.
• Patients may have symptoms related to the tumour (e.g. intestinal
obstruction or haemoptysis).
• Vasoactive peptides result in intermittent flushing, especially of the
head, neck and torso (90%), or diarrhoea (78%), which may lead to
dehydration and electrolyte disturbances.
• Other symptoms include bronchospasm (20%), hypotension,
hypertension, tachycardia and hyperglycaemia.
• Twenty per cent of patients have heart disease related to carcinoid.
Endocardial fibrosis of the pulmonary and tricuspid valves leads to right
heart failure, so consider an echocardiogram preoperatively. ECG may
show rV hypertrophy.
NT- probNP has been shown to be predictive of both heart disease and
mortality.
• Check FbC, electrolytes, LFTs and clotting if metastases present.
• X- match blood.
(See % pp. 720–1 for conduct of anaesthesia.)

--- Page 257 ---

236
236 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Gastrinoma
• Excess production of gastrin by benign adenoma, malignancy or
hyperplasia of D cells of the pancreatic islets.
• Gastrin stimulates acid production from gastric parietal cells. Leads to
Zollinger–E llison syndrome, severe peptic ulceration and diarrhoea.
• May also have GI bleeds, perforation, electrolyte disturbance and
volume depletion.
• Treatment includes high- dose PPIs (e.g. omeprazole), H receptor
2
antagonists and octreotide.
• May present for surgery related to gastrinoma, e.g. perforation, or
pancreatic resection of the tumour or a totally unrelated pathology.
Actively look for anaemia from gastric ulceration and coagulopathy from
liver dysfunction.
• Patients require perioperative invasive pressure monitoring for major
surgery.
• Continue omeprazole postoperatively (up to 60– 80mg/ day), as the
gastric mucosa may have become hypertrophied, producing excess acid.
VIPoma
• rare tumour secreting VIP which leads to Verner– Morrison syndrome.
• Characterised by profuse watery diarrhoea, intestinal ileus, abdominal
distension, confusion, hypokalaemia, achlorhydria, hypomagnesaemia,
hyperglycaemia, metabolic alkalosis and tetany.
• VIP inhibits gastrin release; therefore, give H receptor-b locking drugs
2
preoperatively to prevent rebound gastric acid hypersecretion.
• Will often require a period of resuscitation with correction of fluid
losses and electrolytes prior to surgery.
• Treat medically with somatostatin analogues (octreotide). If this fails, try
steroids (such as methylprednisolone) and indometacin (a prostaglandin
inhibitor).
• Sixty per cent malignant with liver metastases, so all warrant resection.
• use invasive pressure monitoring for major surgery.
• AbG to check the acid– base status and electrolytes.
Insulinoma
• rare tumour of β cells of the pancreas which secrete insulin.
• Whipple’s triad of clinical presentation: fasting hypoglycaemia,
symptoms of hypoglycaemia and relief of symptoms when glucose
is given.
• Diagnosis also made by a fasting blood glucose <2.2mmol/L , i insulin,
i C- peptide and no plasma sulfonylurea.
• Patients often have to eat high-c arbohydrate diets and limit exercise to
avoid hypoglycaemia; this predisposes to obesity and its sequelae.
• Medical treatment is used to reduce symptoms. Diazoxide (a non-
diuretic benzothiazide which inhibits the release of insulin and stimulates
glycogenolysis) has been used but has unpredictable efficacy and is
avoided in hypoglycaemic presentations. Can cause significant fluid
retention and oedema.
• Octreotide is also used. It binds with somatostatin receptors on
insulinomas and decreases insulin secretion in 40–6 0% of patients; it
can, however, worsen hypoglycaemia and should be monitored.

--- Page 258 ---

APuDOMAS 237
• Tumours rarely malignant, but if so, enucleation or pancreatic resection
required.
• Start 10% glucose and K+ infusion preoperatively, and monitor blood
glucose closely perioperatively, particularly at the time of tumour
manipulation.
• Almost immediate rise in glucose once tumour resected (IV glucose
may be paused temporarily to observe for this).
Glucagonoma
• Tumour of α cells of the pancreas.
• Glucagon stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis,
resulting in i blood glucose and DM. Ketoacidosis is rare, since insulin is
also i.
• Characterised by a rash (necrotising migratory erythema which presents
in the groin/ perineum and migrates to the distal extremities).
• Often cachectic and may require antibiotics for skin infection.
• Associated with weight loss, glossitis, stomatitis, anaemia and diarrhoea.
• Patients usually have liver metastases at presentation.
• Treatment consists of surgical debulking and somatostatin analogues.
• i incidence of venous thrombosis and PE, so give prophylactic
antithrombotic therapy.
Further reading
Mancuso K, Kaye AD, boudreaux JP, et al. (2011). Carcinoid syndrome and perioperative anesthetic
considerations. J Clin Anesth, 23, 329– 41.
Powell b, Al Mukhtar A, Mills GH (2011). Carcinoid: the disease and its implications for anaesthesia.
Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 11, 9– 13.
References
1 Kaltsas G, Caplin M, Davies P, Ferone D, et al.; Antibes Consensus Conference participants
(2017). ENETS Consensus Guidelines for the Standards of Care in Neuroendocrine Tumors:
pre- and perioperative therapy in patients with neuroendocrine tumors. Neuroendocrinology, 105,
245– 54.

--- Page 259 ---

238
238 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Hypokalaemia
Defined as plasma K+ <3.5mmol/ L.
• Mild • 3.0– 3.5mmol/ L
• Moderate • 2.5– 3.0mmol/ L
• Severe • <2.5mmol/ L
Causes
• d intake.
• i K+ loss: vomiting or nasogastric (NG) suctioning, diarrhoea, pyloric
stenosis, diuretics, renal tubular acidosis, hyperaldosteronism, Mg2+
depletion, leukaemia.
• Intercompartmental shift: insulin, alkalosis (pH increase of 0.1 decreases
K+ by 0.6mmol/ L), β2- agonists and steroids.
Clinical manifestations
• ECG changes: T wave flattening and inversion, prominent u wave, ST-
segment depression, prolonged P– r interval.
• Dysrhythmias, d cardiac contractility.
• Skeletal muscle weakness, tetany, ileus, polyuria, impaired renal
concentrating ability, d insulin secretion, d growth hormone secretion,
d aldosterone secretion, negative nitrogen balance.
• Encephalopathy in patients with liver disease.
Management
• Check u&E, creatinine, Ca2+, phosphate, Mg2+, HCO– and glucose if
3
other electrolyte disturbances suspected. Hypokalaemia resistant to
treatment may be due to concurrent hypomagnesaemia.
• Exclude Cushing’s and Conn’s syndromes.
• Oral replacement is safest, up to 200mmol/ d, e.g. KCl (Sando- K®) two
tablets qds = 96mmol K+.
• IV replacement: essential for patients with cardiac manifestations or
skeletal muscle weakness or where oral replacement not appropriate.
• Aim to increase K+ to 4.0mmol/ L if treating cardiac manifestations.
• Maximum concentration for peripheral administration is 40mmol/L
(greater concentrations than this can lead to venous necrosis); 40mmol
KCl can be given in 100mL of 0.9% sodium chloride over 1h, but only
via an infusion device, with ECG monitoring, in an HDu/I Cu/ theatre
environment and via a central vein. Plasma K+ should be measured at
least hourly during rapid replacement. K+ depletion sufficient to cause
0.3mmol/ L drop in serum K+ requires a loss of 7100mmol of K+ from
total body store.

--- Page 260 ---

HyPOKALAEMIA 239
Anaesthetic considerations
Predominant issue is risk of arrhythmia. Hypokalaemia is significantly as-
sociated with postoperative gastric transit delay, i.e. ileus, its own source
of morbidity.2
• Classically, K+ <3.0mmol/ L has led to postponement of elective
procedures (some controversy exists about this in the fit, non-d igitalised
patient who may well tolerate chronically lower K+ levels, e.g. 2.5mmol/
L, without adverse events).
• For emergency surgery, if possible, replace K+ in the 24h prior to
surgery. Aim for levels of 3.5– 4.0mmol/ L. If this is not possible, use an
IV replacement regime, as documented earlier, intra-/ perioperatively.
• If HCO– is raised, then the loss is probably long-s tanding with low
3
intracellular K+ and will take days to replace.
• May increase sensitivity to NMb; therefore, need to monitor.
• i risk of digoxin toxicity at low K+ levels. Aim for K+ of 4.0mmol/ L in a
digitalised patient.
Further reading
Freshwater-T urner D (2006). Sodium, potassium and the anaesthetist. Anaesthesia UK. M https://
www.frca.co.uk/ article.aspx?articleid=100676
References
2 Zhu Q, Li X, Tan F, et al. (2018). Prevalence and risk factors for hypokalemia in patients sched-
uled for laparoscopic colorectal resection and its association with post- operative recovery. BMC
Gastroenterol, 18, 152.

--- Page 261 ---

240
240 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Hyperkalaemia
Defined as plasma K+ >5.5mmol/ L.
• Mild • 5.5– 6.0mmol/ L
• Moderate • 6.1– 7.0mmol/ L
• Severe • >7.0mmol/ L
Causes
• i intake, e.g. IV administration, rapid blood transfusion.
• i urinary excretion, e.g. renal failure (acute or chronic), adrenocortical
insufficiency, drugs (K+- sparing diuretics, ACE inhibitors,
ciclosporin, etc.).
• Intercompartmental shift of K+, e.g. acidosis (H+ is taken into the cell,
in exchange for K+), rhabdomyolysis, trauma, MH, suxamethonium
(especially with burns or denervation injuries), familial periodic paralysis.
• Pseudohyperkalaemia due to in vitro haemolysis.
• Commonest risk factors are AKI, cardiovascular disease, CKD, diabetes
and drugs affecting CVS/ renal– aldosterone– angiotensin system.
Clinical manifestations
• ECG changes, progressing through peaked T waves, widened QrS,
prolonged P– r interval, loss of P wave, loss of r wave amplitude, ST
depression, VF, asystole. ECG changes potentiated by low Ca2+, low Na+
and acidosis.
• Muscle weakness at K+ >8.0mmol/ L.
• Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea.
Management
• Treatment should be initiated if K+ >6.5mmol/ L or ECG changes
present.
• unlike hypokalaemia, the incidence of serious cardiac compromise
is high and therefore, intervention is important. Treat the cause, if
possible.
• Ensure IV access and cardiac monitor.
• Insulin 10 units in 50mL of 50% glucose IV over 30– 60min. This has
the fastest onset of action and is very effective in reducing serum K+ by
shifting K+ into the cells. beware rebound occurs within 2h.
• β2- agonist, salbutamol 5– 10mg nebulised, but beware tachycardia.
Should see a response at 30min and has a longer duration of action than
insulin.
• 5– 10mL of 10% calcium gluconate or 3– 5mL of 10% calcium chloride.
Ca2+ stabilises the myocardium by increasing the threshold potential.
rapid onset, short- lived.
• If acidotic, give HCO– 50mmol IV.
3
• Ion exchange resin: calcium polystyrene sulfonate (e.g. resonium
calcium) 5g PO or 30g per rectum (Pr) 8- hourly. This binds K+ in
the gut.
• If initial management fails, consider dialysis or haemofiltration.

--- Page 262 ---

HyPErKALAEMIA 241
Anaesthetic considerations
• Do not consider elective surgery. If life- threatening surgery, treat
hyperkalaemia first.
• Avoid Hartmann’s solution and suxamethonium; rocuronium is the
preferred choice, although suxamethonium has been used safely with K+
of 5.5.3 Monitor NMb, since effects may be accentuated.
• Avoid hypothermia and acidosis.
• Control ventilation to prevent respiratory acidosis.
• Monitor K+ regularly.
Further reading
Kovesdy CP (2017). updates in hyperkalemia: outcomes and therapeutic strategies. Rev Endocr
Metab Disord, 18, 41– 7.
References
3 Schow AJ, Lubarsky DA, Olson rP, et al. (2002). Can succinylcholine be used safely in
hyperkalaemic patients? Anesth Analg, 95, 119– 22.

--- Page 263 ---

242
242 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Hyponatraemia
Defined as serum Na+ <135mmol/ L.
• Mild 125– 134mmol/ L
• Moderate 120– 124mmol/ L
• Severe <120mmol/ L
ECF volume is directly proportional to total body Na+ content. renal Na+
excretion ultimately controls the ECF volume and total body Na+ content.
To identify the causes of abnormalities of Na+, assess plasma and urinary
Na+ levels and the patient’s state of hydration. Causes are summarised in
Fig. 9.1. Presentation depends on speed of onset, rather than on absolute
Na+ level— it is rare to get clinical signs if Na+ >125mmol/ L.
Signs
Neuropsychiatric symptoms, nausea/ vomiting, muscular weakness, head-
ache, lethargy, seizures, coma and respiratory depression.
Treatment of acute symptomatic hyponatraemia (<48h)
• Aim to raise serum Na+ by 2mmol/ L/ h until symptoms resolve.
Complete correction is unnecessary. May need to infuse hypertonic
(3%) sodium chloride at a rate of 1.2– 2.4mL/ kg/ h through a large vein
(can be i to 4– 6mL/ kg/h if seizures/ coma). Care needed— measure
Na+ levels hourly.
• In cases of fluid excess, give furosemide 20mg IV.
Treatment of chronic hyponatraemia
• Asymptomatic, fluid- restrict to 1L/ d.
• Symptomatic (>48h): aim to correct serum Na+ by 5– 10mmol/ d. rapid
correction (serum Na+ rise of >0.5mmol/ L/ h) can lead to central
pontine myelinolysis, subdural haemorrhage and cardiac failure.
• Hypovolaemic: correct with 0.9% sodium chloride (removes ADH
response that accentuates Na+/ water imbalance).
• Hypervolaemic: fluid- restrict and give furosemide. For syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (secretion) (SIADH), also give
demeclocycline 300– 600mg/ d.
• Consult with an endocrinologist and treat the underlying cause.
Anaesthetic implications
• No elective surgery if Na+ <120mmol/ L or symptomatic
hyponatraemia. If surgery urgent, consult endocrinologist and assess
risk/ benefit ratio.
Further reading
Leise MD, Findlay Jy (2017). Hyponatremia in the perioperative period: when and how to correct.
Clin Liver Dis, 9, 111– 14.
Sterns rH (2015). Disorders of plasma sodium— causes, consequences and correction. N Engl J
Med, 372, 55– 65.

--- Page 264 ---

HyPONATrAEMIA 243
muidos
mureS
L/lomm531<
ytiralomso
amsalP
ytiralomso
amsalP
gk/lomm592>
ytiralomso
amsalP
gk/lomm
592–082
AIMEACYLGREPYH
gk/lomm082<
AIMEARTANOPYHODUESP
DIULF
CINOTREPYH
cimealovrepyH
cimealovopyH
cimealovuE
L/lomm02>
muidos
yranirU
HDAIS
muidos
yranirU
YCNEICIFED
DIOCITROCOCULG
L/lomm02≤
muidos
yranirU
SCITERUID
muidos
yranirU
L/lomm02≤
muidos
yranirU
ERULIAF
TRAEH
L/lomm02>
YCNANGILAM
L/lomm02>
.g.e
SESSOL
LANERERP
SISOHRRIC
ERULIAF
LANER
.g.e ,SSOL
LANER
,aeohrraid
,alutsfi
:IG
MSIDIORYHTOPYH
ytiralomso
mures
<
ytiralomso
enirU
eruliaf
laneR
gnitimov
EMORDNYS
CITORHPEN
SSECXE
RO
MUIDOS
ROOP
diocitroconerdA
snrub
,taews
:nikS
YCNANGERP
NOITPMUSNOC
RETAW
ycneicffiusni
sisohrriC
EMORDNYS
PRUT
sciteruiD
.aimeartanopyh
fo
sisongaiD
1.9
.giF

--- Page 265 ---

244
244 CHAPTEr 9 Endocrine and metabolic disease
Hypernatraemia
Defined as serum Na+ >145mmol/ L.
• Mild 145– 150mmol/ L
• Moderate 151– 160mmol/ L
• Severe >160mmol/ L
Caused by excessive salt intake or, more frequently, inadequate water in-
take. Important to assess the volume status.
Causes
Hypovolaemic
renal (loop/ osmotic diuretics, intrinsic renal disease, post- obstruction) and
extrarenal (diarrhoea/v omiting, burns, excessive sweating, fistulae).
Euvolaemic
Diabetes insipidus, insensible losses.
Hypervolaemic
Na+ ingestion/ administration of hypertonic sodium chloride, Conn’s syn-
drome, Cushing’s syndrome.
Presentation
• CNS symptoms likely if serum Na+ >155mmol/ L due to hyperosmolar
state and cellular dehydration, e.g. thirst, confusion, seizures and coma.
• Features depend on the cause, e.g. water deficiency will present with
hypotension, tachycardia and d skin turgor.
Management
• Correct over at least 48h to prevent occurrence of cerebral oedema
and convulsions.
• Treat the underlying cause. Give oral fluids (water), if possible.
• Hypovolaemic (Na+ deficiency): 0.9% sodium chloride until
hypovolaemia corrected, then consider 0.45% sodium chloride.
• Euvolaemia (water depletion): estimate the total body water (TbW)
deficit; treat with 5% glucose.
• Hypervolaemic (Na+ excess): diuretics, e.g. furosemide 20mg IV and 5%
glucose; dialysis if required.
• Diabetes insipidus: replace urinary losses, and give desmopressin (1–4
micrograms daily SC/ IM/ IV).
Anaesthetic implications
• No elective surgery if Na+ >155mmol/ L or hypovolaemic.
• urgent surgery: consider CVP monitoring and be aware of dangers of
rapid normalisation of electrolytes.
Further reading
bagshaw SM, Townsend Dr, McDermid rC (2009). Disorders of sodium and water balance in hos-
pitalized patients. Can J Anaesth, 56, 151– 67.