# Chapter 10: Bone, Joint and Connective Tissue Disorders

## 骨骼關節與結締組織疾病


--- Page 266 ---

Chapter 10 245
Bone, joint and connective
tissue disorders
David Howell
Rheumatoid arthritis 246
Ankylosing spondylitis 249
Systemic lupus erythematosus 250
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) 251
Scoliosis 251
Achondroplasia 252

--- Page 267 ---

246
246 ChApteR 10 Bone, joint and connective tissue disorders
Rheumatoid arthritis
RA is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disorder, mainly involving synovial
joints, but with extra-a rticular effects. Overall prevalence in the UK is 1.5
per 100 000 in ♂, and 3.6 per 100 000 in ♀, with a peak incidence in the
7th decade. It also affects children as Still’s disease. there is a higher-t han-
average mortality due to both the disease itself and the presence of con-
current disorders.
Preoperative assessment
Articular
• Temporomandibular: assess for limited mouth opening.
• Cricoarytenoid: fixation of the cricoarytenoid joints may lead to voice
changes or even rarely to stridor from glottic stenosis. the larynx can
also be obstructed by amyloid or rheumatoid nodules. Minimal oedema
may lead to airway obstruction postoperatively.
• Atlantoaxial subluxation occurs in 725% of severe rheumatoid
patients, but of these, only a quarter will have neurological signs or
symptoms. Risk factors include disease duration >8y, glucocorticoid
use, seropositivity and nodular and erosive peripheral joint disease.
enquire about tingling hands or neck pain, and assess the range of neck
movement (table 10.1).
• Subaxial subluxation (i.e. below C2): >2mm loss of alignment is
significant. Look for this particularly if the patient has undergone
previous fusion at a higher level.
• Other joints: assess joint deformities with a view to positioning and
possible regional anaesthesia. Manual dexterity may be important if
planning to use standard pCA apparatus after surgery.
Non- articular
• CVS: i risk of CAD. Systemic vasculitis may lead to arterial occlusion in
various organs and Raynaud’s. they may have myocardial fibrosis and
amyloid or nodular involvement. pericarditis and pericardial effusions
uncommon. Aortic incompetence and endocarditis rare. At risk of Vte.
• Respiratory: interstitial lung disease leading to restrictive defects may
also be 2° to drugs (fibrosing alveolitis, pneumonitis). pulmonary
nodules. pleural disease (pleuritis and effusions) and airway involvement
(obliterative bronchiolitis). Costochondral disease may reduce chest
wall compliance.
• Haematological: normocytic, normochromic anaemia of chronic
disease. Drug- associated myelosuppression and NSAID- associated
blood loss. Felty’s syndrome is a combination of splenomegaly
and neutropenia and may be associated with anaemia and
thrombocytopenia.
• Nervous system: central (due to axial involvement) and peripheral
compression neuropathies (e.g. carpal tunnel syndrome).
• Sjögren’s syndrome and resultant dry eyes put patients at risk of corneal
ulceration under anaesthesia.
• Infections: common from the disease itself and drug effects.
• Renal and hepatic: CKD commonly from drugs, less frequently from
glomerulonephritis. d albumin, i fibrinogen and α- 1 acid glycoprotein
(acute phase protein).
• Fragile skin and difficult venous access.

--- Page 268 ---

RheUMAtOID ARthRItIS 247
Table 10.1 Atlantoaxial subluxation
Type Incidence Pathology Imaging
Anterior 80% Destruction of transverse >3mm between
ligament odontoid and arch
C1 forward on C2 of atlas in lateral
exacerbated by neck flexion flexion
posterior 5% Destruction of Loss of odontoid
odontoid peg peg on lateral neck
C1 backward on C2 extension
exacerbated by neck
extension
Vertical 10– 20% Odontoid moves >4.5mm movement
upward through foramen of odontoid above
magnum to compress the McGregor line
cervicomedullary junction (lateral view)
Destruction of lateral
masses of C1
Lateral Uncommon Destruction of C1/ C2 >2mm difference in
facet joints lateral alignment on
Spinal nerve + vertebral odontoid view
artery compression
Lateral/ rotation of C1
on C2
Investigations
• Rheumatologist or spinal surgeon involvement is recommended
in patients with neurological symptoms or signs and in those with
persistent neck pain. preoperative cervical spine flexion/e xtension
views are controversial. Stabilisation surgery may be necessary before
elective surgery is undertaken. Specialist radiological advice should be
sought.
• pFts should be carried out for patients with suspected respiratory
involvement.
• Nasendoscopy preoperatively if suggestion of cricoarytenoid arthritis.
• echocardiography is needed if there is valvular or pericardial
involvement and in symptomatic cardiac disease.
Drugs in the perioperative period
• Steroid use should be minimised prior to surgery. Steroid
supplementation if indicated (see % pp. 230–1).
• NSAIDs: continue to enable early mobilisation. Stop if postoperative
bleeding is a potential problem, hypotension or deterioration in renal
function.
• DMARDs: these drugs include gold, penicillamine and
immunosuppressant drugs such as methotrexate, azathioprine,
cyclophosphamide, ciclosporin, leflunomide and sulfasalazine. Continue
as little evidence that omission reduces postoperative complications
(wound infections). If leucopenic or for high- risk procedures, consult
with the rheumatologist.

--- Page 269 ---

248
248 ChApteR 10 Bone, joint and connective tissue disorders
• Biological DMARDs include tumour necrosis factor (tNF) inhibitors
(etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab), IL (interleukin)-1
inhibitors (anakinra), IL- 6 inhibitors (tocilizumab) and B- cell inhibitors
(rituximab). the potential i risk of postoperative infection needs to be
balanced against the risk of perioperative flare. Consider ceasing at least
one dosing interval prior to surgery, or longer for high-r isk procedures.
Specifically, rituximab and tocilizumab should ideally be stopped 3–6 mo
and 4w, respectively, prior to elective surgery. Recommence around
14d postoperatively if uncomplicated postoperative course.
Operative considerations
• Consider regional anaesthesia (may be technically difficult), if possible,
to minimise the need for airway instrumentation.
• Unless it is certain that the cervical spine is stable, all rheumatoid
patients should be treated as if they have an unstable spine, given that
the majority of patients with atlantoaxial subluxation are asymptomatic.
Restriction of cervical spine motion (ROCSM) is necessary during
airway manipulation while the patient is unconscious. If intubation
is necessary, consider videolaryngoscopy or fibreoptic intubation
if difficulties are anticipated, and a smaller ett in the setting of
cricoarytenoid disease.
• Blood conservation strategies in anaemic patients.
• ensure careful positioning and padding/p rotection of vulnerable areas.
Note comfortable position before induction, then try to maintain this
during surgery.
• Avoid hypothermia which may increase the risk of wound infection.
Postoperative
• Monitor for post- extubation oedema from cricoarytenitis.
• Adequate pain control and physiotherapy for early mobilisation.
• DVt prophylaxis (see % pp. 59–61) until the patient is fully mobile.
• Maintain fluid intake, and monitor renal function.

--- Page 270 ---

ANKyLOSING SpONDyLItIS 249
Ankylosing spondylitis
Inflammatory arthritis of the sacroiliac joints and spine, leading to ankylosis
and ‘bamboo spine’. Associated with hLA-B 27 in >90% of cases. More
common in ♂, with peak age onset in the 3rd decade.
Articular
• progressive kyphosis and fixation of the spine may hinder intubation.
Conventional intubation and tracheostomy may be impossible.
Atlantoaxial subluxation and myelopathy can occur rarely. there may
be limited mouth opening from temporomandibular involvement.
Use of intubating laryngeal mask airway (LMA) or videolaryngoscopy
described, but fibreoptic intubation usually preferred.
• At risk of occult cervical fracture with minimal trauma, so ensure the
head is supported and not left self- supporting.
• Cricoarytenoid arthritis may make cords susceptible to trauma and
oedema.
• Spinal anaesthesia is often difficult; consider using a paramedian
approach. possible i risk of epidural haematoma with epidural block.
• Restrictive pulmonary disease from diminished chest expansion and
spinal mobility. effective external cardiac massage may be impossible.
• Deformity leads to difficulty with positioning, particularly if a prone
position is required.
Non- articular
• Apical fibrosis, which contributes to the restrictive lung defect.
• AR (1%). Mitral valve involvement and conduction defects are rare.
• Amyloid may cause renal involvement.
• Cauda equina syndrome may occur in long- standing cases.
• Side effects of NSAIDs and biological and non- biological DMARDs (see
% pp. 247–8 and pp. 1155–6).

--- Page 271 ---

250
250 ChApteR 10 Bone, joint and connective tissue disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
this is a chronic multisystem autoimmune disease, commonest in young
♀, especially in pregnancy. It is characterised by the presence of numerous
antibodies, including antinuclear antibody, and immune- mediated tissue
damage.
Preoperative assessment
• Skin and joint involvement is common, as are oral and pharyngeal
ulcerations.
• CVS: pericarditis in 15% of cases. Myocarditis, endocarditis and
conduction abnormalities are less common. Raynaud’s phenomenon
30%. CAD.
• Respiratory: infections and pes common. pleuritis and pleural effusion.
pulmonary fibrosis less common.
• Neurological: cranial and peripheral nerve lesions may occur 2° to
arteritis and ischaemia. transverse myelitis, leading to weakness or
paraplegia, is rare. Depression, psychosis and seizures are possible.
• Renal: glomerulonephritis, which may lead to nephrotic syndrome and
renal failure.
• haematological: cytopenias, clotting disorders or hypercoagulable states
can occur. Immune thrombocytopenia or circulating anticoagulants (e.g.
antibodies to factor VIII) may be present. Up to a third of patients with
SLe may demonstrate features of antiphospholipid syndrome (see %
p. 289).
• higher risk of CVe with antiphospholipid antibodies.
• Steroids and other immunosuppressant drugs are used.
Anaesthesia
• there may be absolute or relative contraindications to neuraxial blocks
in patients taking anticoagulants or in patients with coagulopathy (see
% p. 1110). the presence of a peripheral nerve lesion may be a relative
contraindication to neuraxial/ regional nerve blockade.
• Maintenance of normothermia may reduce the risk of infection, as well
as lessening the impact of Raynaud’s phenomenon, if present.
• Laryngeal erythema and oedema are common— try to minimise trauma
to the airway.
• Consider hourly urine output and invasive monitoring.
• Steroid supplementation (see % pp. 230–1).
• Strict asepsis with invasive procedures, as i risk of infection.
• perioperative Vte prophylaxis.

--- Page 272 ---

SySteMIC SCLeROSIS (SCLeRODeRMA) 251
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
A progressive multisystem disease characterised by widespread vascular
dysfunction and fibrosis of the skin and viscera.
the limited cutaneous form, comprising calcinosis, Raynaud’s, oe-
sophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia (CReSt), is more
common (60% of cases) than the more aggressive diffuse cutaneous form,
which has more widespread effects and a high mortality.
the following may be relevant to anaesthesia:
• CVS: Raynaud’s, pericarditis or myocardial fibrosis. Conduction defects.
pulmonary hypertension is common.
• pulmonary: fibrosing alveolitis in both forms (40% in diffuse form).
• Renal: may develop renal crisis associated with malignant hypertension.
• GI: oesophageal reflux invariable.
• Airway: limited mouth opening and tightened skin around the face/
neck, leading to difficult mask ventilation and intubation. Careful airway
instrumentation in setting of telangiectasia.
• Dermal thickening and contractures: difficulty with IV access and
positioning.
• Immunosuppressant medication.
Scoliosis
progressive lateral curvature of the spine with added rotation. Scoliosis may
lead to an increasing restrictive ventilatory defect which, in turn, leads to
hypoxia, hypercapnia and pulmonary hypertension. Scoliosis may be idio-
pathic (775%) or 2° to other conditions with anaesthetic implications:
• Muscular dystrophies
• poliomyelitis
• Cerebral palsy
• Friedreich’s ataxia
• Marfan syndrome and ehlers– Danlos syndrome.
Conduct of anaesthesia
• Formal pFts. Cobb angle exceeding 65° is likely to be associated with
compromised respiratory function.
• Check for pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.
• Some muscular dystrophies may be associated with cardiac
abnormalities. Consider echocardiography (see % p. 318).
• May be difficult laryngoscopy.
• Neuraxial anaesthesia more difficult.
• Intraoperative spinal cord monitoring is recommended for all spinal
deformity corrective surgery (see % pp. 629–33).
• Invasive arterial monitoring and potential significant blood loss.
• Multimodal analgesia, including regional techniques (e.g. paravertebral
blocks) where possible.
• plan for high dependency or intensive care in complex cases.

--- Page 273 ---

252
252 ChApteR 10 Bone, joint and connective tissue disorders
Achondroplasia
the commonest form of dwarfism is caused by premature ossification of
bones, combined with normal periosteal bone formation, giving a charac-
teristic appearance of short limbs and a relatively normal cranium. the fol-
lowing should be noted:
• Large head and tongue, mid- facial hypoplasia, obesity and small
larynx may lead to difficulties managing the airway. Laryngoscopy may
additionally be compromised by pectus carinatum.
• Foramen magnum stenosis is common. Avoid hyperextension during
intubation.
• Central and peripheral venous access is often difficult.
• Use an appropriately sized Bp cuff.
• OSA is common (see % pp. 73–5).
• Restrictive ventilatory defects may occur and can lead to pulmonary
hypertension.
• Regional techniques may be difficult.
• the back may be normal. the epidural space is often narrowed with
spinal canal stenosis. the volume of LA needed for a subarachnoid
and epidural block is reduced. epidural over spinal anaesthesia may be
preferred due to ability to titrate to desired height.
• the patient is of normal intelligence.
Further reading
holroyd CR, Seth R, Bukhari M, et al. (2019). British Society for Rheumatology biologic DMARD
safety guidelines in inflammatory arthritis. Rheumatology, 58, 220– 6.
Spiegel J, hellman M (2015). Achondroplasia: implications and management strategies in anesthesia.
Anaesthesia News. M https:// www.anesthesiologynews.com/ Review- Articles/ Article/ 10- 15/
Achondroplasia- Implications- and- Management- Strategies- in- Anesthesia/ 33892/ ses=ogst
Samanta R, Shoukrey K, Griffiths R (2011). Rheumatoid arthritis and anaesthesia. Anaesthesia, 66,
1146– 59.
Ben- Menachem e (2010). Systemic lupus erythematosus: a review for anesthesiologists. Anesth Analg,
111, 665– 76.
Woodward LJ, Kam pCA (2009). Ankylosing spondylitis: recent developments and anaesthetic im-
plications. Anaesthesia, 64, 540– 8.
Mitra S, Nilanjan D, Gomber K (2007). emergency caesarian section in a patient with achondroplasia:
an anaesthetic dilemma. J Anesth Clin Pharmacol, 23, 315– 18.