# Chapter 11: Haematology

## 血液學


--- Page 274 ---

Chapter 11 253
Haematology
Peter Valentine and Pete Ford
Anaemia 254
Sickle- cell disease 257
Porphyria 260
Rare blood disorders 263
Disorders of coagulation 265
Haemophilia and related disorders 267
Thrombocytopenia 268
Anticoagulants 269
Antiplatelet drugs 277
Fibrinolytic drugs 280
Haemostatic drug therapy 281
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 283
Coagulation tests 284
Hypercoagulability syndromes 288

--- Page 275 ---

254
254 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Anaemia
Anaemia is defined as Hb below normal for age and sex. Conventionally,
this is <130g/ dL in an adult ♂ and <120g/ dL in an adult ♀. Common
causes of anaemia in the surgical patient are:
• Blood loss: acute or chronic (usually resulting in iron deficiency)
• Bone marrow failure: infiltration by tumour or suppression by drugs
• Megaloblastic anaemias: folate or vitamin B deficiency
12
• Complex anaemias: effects on production and breakdown, e.g. renal
failure, RA and hypothyroidism
• Haemolytic anaemias: either inherited (thalassaemia, sickle-c ell disease
(SCD), spherocytosis) or acquired (autoimmune, drugs, infections), or
physical (mechanical heart valves, disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC), prolonged marching known as ‘march haemoglobinuria’).
• Chronic disease or inflammation leads to i hepcidin release from the
liver which inhibits iron absorption from the gut despite normal to high
ferritin. Unlikely to respond to oral iron therapy.
Clinical
• Associated with fatigue, dyspnoea, palpitations, headaches and angina.
Severity often reflects the speed of onset more than the degree of
anaemia, as there is less time for adaptation.
• Common causes should be elicited, including relevant family history;
always enquire about NSAIDs and alcohol.
• Respiratory and cardiovascular pathology may be worsened by the
anaemia or make its impact greater.
Investigations
• Measure Hb prior to surgery in appropriate patients (see % p. 28),
including all those at risk of anaemia undergoing major surgery and
patients with significant comorbidities, especially heart or lung
disease.
• Much can be deduced from Hb and mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
alone but in many instances a blood film gives additional useful
information.
• Confirmatory tests, such as ferritin, cobalamin (B ) and folate levels,
12
reticulocyte count, direct Coombs’ test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(eSR), liver and renal function and bone marrow cytology, should be
requested, as appropriate.
Preparation
Patients scheduled for elective surgery should have FBC checked in the
weeks approaching the operation so that abnormalities can be investigated
and corrected in time (Fig. 11.1).
• Where surgery can be safely postponed, it is more appropriate and
safer to treat the underlying cause and raise the Hb slowly with simple,
effective measures, e.g. PO or IV iron and B injections. Transfusing a
12
patient with pernicious anaemia may precipitate heart failure.

--- Page 276 ---

ANAeMIA 255
susnesnoc
lanoitanretnI
.)6102(
.la
te
,AA
nielK
morf
decudorpeR
.aimeana
evitarepoirep
fo
noitacfiissalc
rof
mhtiroglA
1.11
.giF
&
yeliW
nhoJ
morf
noissimrep
htiw
,74
–332
,27
,aisehtseanA
.ycneicfied
nori
dna
aimeana
fo
tnemeganam
evitarepo
-irep
eht
no
tnemetats
.srohtuA
ehT
6102
©
.dtL
snoS

--- Page 277 ---

256
256 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
IV iron preparations are now available that can be given over a few min-
utes and will render a patient immediately iron-r eplete; typical Hb increase
10– 20mg/ L after 10d (see also % pp. 54–6).
• Many IV preparations exist. A common preparation is iron isomaltoside
(Monofer®); a single dose of 20mg/ kg (typically 1000mg) will render a
patient iron-r eplete with a 15min infusion and with minimal side effects.
Check your local protocol or discuss with a haematologist.
Perioperative blood transfusion
(See also % pp. 450–9.)
Recent RCTs have confirmed that transfusion is not required for mild an-
aemia, even in the presence of CVS disease. In some of these trials, the use
of a lower ‘transfusion trigger’ has been associated with lower mortality.
Coexisting disease, chronicity of anaemia and the expected perioperative
blood loss all inform the decision of whether to transfuse or not. The fol-
lowing are accepted levels for transfusion:
• Red cell transfusion is indicated if the Hb level is <70g/L .
• Checking a HemoCue® gives comparable results to a Coulter counter
and can help to avoid a transfusion if >80g/ L.
• For patients with IHD:
• Mild (angina rarely): accept Hb 70– 80g/ L
• Moderate (angina regularly, but stable): accept Hb 80– 90g/ L
• Severe (recent MI, unstable angina): accept Hb 100g/ dL or higher.

--- Page 278 ---

SICKLe-CeLL DISeASe 257
Sickle- cell disease
Sickle-cell disease (SCD) is caused by inheriting sickling haemoglobinopathies,
either in the homozygous (HbSS; sickle-c ell anaemia) or heterozygous
(HbAS; sickle- cell trait) state, or in combination with another Hb β chain
abnormality such as Hb C (HbSC disease), Hb D (HbSD disease) or β-
thalassaemia (HbS/β - thal). It is estimated that there are now over 15
000 patients with SCD in Britain. SCD is endemic in parts of Africa, the
Mediterranean, the Middle east and India. The highest incidence is from
equatorial Africa; all patients from areas with a high prevalence should have
a sickle test preoperatively.
The pathology of SCD is primarily a result of vaso-o cclusion by sickled
red cells, leading to haemolysis and tissue infarction. This can be precipi-
tated by hypoxia, hypothermia, pyrexia, acidosis, dehydration or infection.
Other variant haemoglobins Hb C and Hb D-P unjab, in association with
HbS, enhance the sickling process, whereas HbF (fetal Hb) impedes it.
• Susceptibility to sickling is proportional to the concentration of
HbS. In the heterozygous state (sickle- cell trait), sickling is extremely
uncommon as HbS concentration is <50%.
• These patients have a positive sickle solubility test (Sickledex®),
but normal blood film and Hb level. This can be confirmed by Hb
electrophoresis or, in an emergency, a normal blood film should suffice.
• These patients do not need special treatment, other than avoidance of
extreme hypoxia, dehydration, infection, acidosis and hypothermia.
Clinical features
The manifestations of SCD do not become apparent before 3–4 mo of age,
when the main switch from fetal to adult Hb occurs.
• There is great variability, not only between patients, but also within
individual patients at different periods of life. Many remain well most of
the time.
• Vaso- occlusive crises are the commonest cause of morbidity and
mortality. The presentation may be dramatic with an acute abdomen,
‘acute chest syndrome’ (acute pneumonia- like), CVe, priapism and
painful dactylitis. By the time patients reach adulthood, most will
have small, fibrotic spleens and are functionally asplenic, with the
associated risk of overwhelming septicaemia. A less acute complication
is proliferative retinopathy due to retinal vessel occlusion and
neovascularisation (more common in HbSC disease).
• Aplastic crises are characterised by temporary shutdown of the
marrow, manifested by a precipitous fall in Hb and an absence of
reticulocytes. Infection with parvovirus B19 and/o r folate deficiency are
the two precipitating factors.
• Sequestration crises occur mainly in children. Sudden massive pooling of
red cells in the spleen can cause hypotension and severe exacerbation
of anaemia, with fatal consequences, unless transfusion is given in time.
• Haemolytic crises manifest by a fall in Hb and a rise in reticulocytes/
bilirubin, and usually accompany vaso- occlusive crises. Chronic
haemolysis leads to gallstones in virtually all patients with SCD, though
many remain asymptomatic.

--- Page 279 ---

258
258 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Laboratory features
• Hb is usually 6– 9g/ dL (often lower than suggested by the clinical
picture). Reticulocytes are almost always i, and the film shows sickled
cells and target cells. Howell– Jolly bodies are present if the spleen
is atrophic. Leucocytosis and thrombocytosis are common reactive
features. In the sickle-c ell trait, the Hb and film are normal.
• Screening tests for sickling which rely on deoxygenation of HbS are
positive in both HbSS and HbAS.
• Hb electrophoresis distinguishes SS, AS and other haemoglobinopathies.
Measurement of the HbS level is important in certain clinical situations
where a level of <30% is aimed for. It is not necessary to wait for the
results of electrophoresis before embarking on emergency surgery.
Clinical history, Hb level, a positive sickle test and the blood picture
usually allow distinction between SCD and the sickle-c ell trait.
Management
As no effective routine treatment exists for SCD, care is directed towards
prophylaxis, support and treatment of complications. Folic acid supple-
ments, pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccinations
and penicillin prophylaxis (to protect from the susceptibility to infection
caused by d splenic function) are recommended from an early age, prefer-
ably within a comprehensive care programme.
• For crises: rest, rehydration with PO/ IV fluids, antibiotics if infection is
suspected; maintain PaO; keep warm; prompt and effective analgesia
2
(traditionally diamorphine/ morphine is used over pethidine; regional
anaesthesia very effective).
• Blood transfusions may be lifesaving, but the indications are limited.1
exchange transfusions have a role in some vaso- occlusive crises (acute
chest syndrome, CVe). Always discuss with a haematologist. For
patients with high perioperative risk, transfusing to achieve an HbS level
of <30% may decrease complications but is controversial.
Preoperative preparation
Always seek expert advice from a haematologist well before surgery. A
sample for group and antibody screening should be sent well in advance,
as previously transfused sickle- cell patients often have red cell antibodies.
Perioperative and postoperative care
Special attention must be given to hypoxia, dehydration, infection, acidosis,
hypothermia and pain. These considerations should be continued well into
the postoperative period.
• Dehydration: allow oral fluids as late as possible, and pre- and
postoperative IV fluids.
• Hypoxia: pulse SpO and prophylactic O.
2 2
• Prophylactic antibiotic cover should always be considered because of
i susceptibility to infection.
• Positive pressure ventilation may be required to achieve normocapnia
and avoid acidosis.
• Hypothermia should be avoided by warming the operating room,
using a fluid warmer and active warming such as a Bair Hugger®. Core
temperature should be monitored.
• Regional anaesthesia is not contraindicated, and tourniquets can be
used if limbs are meticulously exsanguinated prior to inflation.

--- Page 280 ---

SICKLe-CeLL DISeASe 259
HbSC disease
• Results from compound heterozygosity for HbS and HbC.
• Affects 0.1% of African Americans.
• Causes SCD, but phenotype may be milder than homozygous HbSS.
• Patients develop anaemia, splenomegaly, jaundice, aseptic necrosis of
the femoral head, hepatic disease, retinal disease and bone marrow and
splenic infarcts.
• Myocardial necrosis has been described after GA.
• Management principles are as for SCD.
• Patients with HbSC disease are more prone to retinal disease and often
maintain splenic function into adult life.

--- Page 281 ---

260
260 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Porphyria
The porphyrias are a group of diseases in which there is an enzyme defect
in the synthesis of the haem moiety, leading to an accumulation of pre-
cursors that are oxidised into porphyrins. There are hepatic and erythro-
poietic varieties. There are eight different forms of porphyria. There are
three autosomal dominant acute hepatic forms, with typically 50% reduc-
tion in usual enzyme activity, that affect the administration of anaesthesia.
Acute intermittent porphyria
The commonest and most severe form of acute porphyria. Common in
Sweden. i urinary porphobilinogen and d- aminolaevulinic acid.
Variegate porphyria
Common in Afrikaners. i Copro- and protoporphyrin in the stool. Dermal
photosensitivity.
Hereditary coproporphyria
Very rare. i urinary porphyrins. Dermal photosensitivity.
Porphyric crises
• Attacks occur most frequently in women in the 3rd to 4th decades.
• Fifty per cent of normal enzyme activity is usually enough to maintain
haemostasis. i demand for haem increases flow through pathway and
increases aminolaevulinic acid and porphyrin production, leading to
symptoms. Factors increasing haem demand, including haemorrhage,
induction of P450 enzymes, stress and dehydration, should be avoided.
• Acute porphyric crises may be precipitated by drugs, stress, infection,
alcohol, menstruation, pregnancy, starvation and dehydration.
• Symptoms include acute abdominal pain, vomiting, motor and sensory
peripheral neuropathy, autonomic dysfunction, cranial nerve palsies,
mental disturbances, coma, convulsions and pyrexia.
General principles
• Patients may never have had an attack; therefore, a positive family
history must be taken seriously.
• Individuals may have normal biochemical tests between attacks.
• Patients may present with unrelated pathology, e.g. appendicitis.
• Symptoms may mimic surgical pathologies, e.g. acute abdominal pain,
acute neurology.
• Any patient giving a strong family history of porphyria must be treated
as potentially at risk. Latent carriers may exhibit no signs and be
potentially negative to biochemical screening, but still be at risk from
acute attacks.
Anaesthetic management
Many commonly used drugs are thought to have the potential to trigger
porphyric crises. However, it is difficult to be definitive, as crises can also be
triggered by infection or stress, which often occur simultaneously. Table 11.1
lists the relative safety of commonly used anaesthetic drugs in patients with
porphyria. The website M www.drugs- porphyria.org contains more com-
plete and up- to- date prescribing information.

--- Page 282 ---

PORPHyRIA 261
Table 11.1 Anaesthetic drugs in porphyria
Not Probably safe Probably or Porphy-
porphyrinogenic possibly por- rinogenic
phyrinogenic
Anaesthetic Propofol Sevoflurane Ketamine Thiopental
agents Isoflurane etomidate Halothane
Desflurane
NO
2
Antiemetics Cimetidine Ondansetron Dexa-
and antacids Omeprazole Cyclizine methasone
Metoclo-
pramide
Ranitidine
Neuro- Suxamethonium Atracurium
muscular- Mivacurium Vecuronium
blocking Rocuronium Pancuronium
drugs
Reversal Intralipid® Neostigmine Flumazenil
agents Sugammadex
Naloxone
Glycopyrronium
bromide
Analgesics Morphine Fentanyl
Pethidine Alfentanil
Clonidine Ibuprofen
Aspirin Paracetamol
Local Bupivacaine Lidocaine
anaesthetics Prilocaine Levo-
bupivacaine
Sedatives Diazepam Dex-
Midazolam medetomidine
Lorazepam
Cardio- Adrenaline ephedrine Amiodarone Methyldopa
vascular Noradrenaline Phenylephrine Hydralazine
Adenosine Atropine
GTN
Antibiotics Benzylpenicillin Ceftriaxone Clarithromycin
Teicoplanin Cefalexin
Metronidazole
Other Dalteparin Furosemide Hydro-
enoxaparin Haloperidol cortisone
Salbutamol Olanzapine Prednisone
Levetiracetam

### Table
| Table 11.1 Anaesthetic drugs in porphyria |
| --- |
| Not Probably safe Probably or Porphy-
porphyrinogenic possibly por- rinogenic
phyrinogenic |
| Anaesthetic Propofol Sevoflurane Ketamine Thiopental
agents Isoflurane etomidate Halothane
Desflurane
NO
2
Antiemetics Cimetidine Ondansetron Dexa-
and antacids Omeprazole Cyclizine methasone
Metoclo-
pramide
Ranitidine
Neuro- Suxamethonium Atracurium
muscular- Mivacurium Vecuronium
blocking Rocuronium Pancuronium
drugs
Reversal Intralipid® Neostigmine Flumazenil
agents Sugammadex
Naloxone
Glycopyrronium
bromide
Analgesics Morphine Fentanyl
Pethidine Alfentanil
Clonidine Ibuprofen
Aspirin Paracetamol
Local Bupivacaine Lidocaine
anaesthetics Prilocaine Levo-
bupivacaine
Sedatives Diazepam Dex-
Midazolam medetomidine
Lorazepam
Cardio- Adrenaline ephedrine Amiodarone Methyldopa
vascular Noradrenaline Phenylephrine Hydralazine
Adenosine Atropine
GTN
Antibiotics Benzylpenicillin Ceftriaxone Clarithromycin
Teicoplanin Cefalexin
Metronidazole
Other Dalteparin Furosemide Hydro-
enoxaparin Haloperidol cortisone
Salbutamol Olanzapine Prednisone
Levetiracetam |
|  |

--- Page 283 ---

262
262 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
• It is important to minimise stress, so consider premedication with
midazolam.
• Minimise preoperative fasting. Use 5% glucose/ 0.9% sodium chloride IV.
• Regional anaesthesia is useful, but in acute porphyric crises, regional
anaesthesia should be avoided as neuropathy may be rapid in onset and
progressive. Detailed preoperative examination and documentation of
any neuropathy are essential. Bupivacaine is considered safe for epidural
anaesthesia.
• PONV prophylaxis is especially recommended, as prolonged starvation
time can be contributory to porphyric crises.
• Measure BP invasively during an acute crisis, as hypovolaemia is
common and autonomic neuropathy may cause labile BP.
• Once common causes (e.g. pain, light anaesthesia) are ruled out,
hypertension and tachycardia should be treated promptly with β-
blockers such as metoprolol.
• Treat seizures with diazepam, propofol or magnesium sulfate (avoid
barbiturates and phenytoin).
• Manage the patient on ICU/ HDU if a crisis is suspected.
• Remember that the onset of a porphyric crisis may be delayed for
up to 5d.
Treatment of acute porphyric crises
• Withdraw drugs that may have precipitated the crisis.
• Give haem arginate 3mg/k g IV once daily for 4d (leads to negative
feedback to aminolaevulinic acid synthetase— the initial enzyme
responsible for haem production). Treat infection, dehydration and
electrolyte imbalance, and give glucose (20g/ h).
• Treat symptoms with ‘safe’ drugs.
• Monitor the patient appropriately.

--- Page 284 ---

RARe BLOOD DISORDeRS 263
Rare blood disorders
Hereditary spherocytosis
Autosomal dominant condition in which erythrocytes have a smaller sur-
face to volume ratio and are abnormally permeable to Na+.
• Inflexible red cells are phagocytosed in the spleen, resulting in
microspherocytic anaemia with marked reticulocytosis. The blood film
is usually diagnostic.
• Splenomegaly is common. Splenectomy leads to a 50–7 0% increase in
red cell survival.
• Splenectomy should not be performed in children <6y of age and
should ideally be preceded by pneumococcal, meningococcal and Hib
vaccines and lifelong PO penicillin, to help avoid infection.
• There are no particular anaesthetic considerations.
Glucose- 6- phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
X- linked trait with variable penetrance in African Americans and people
from the Mediterranean.
• The disease may afford some protection against malaria.
• The glucose- 6- phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) enzyme is responsible
for the production of NADPH, which is involved in the cell’s defence
against oxidative stresses such as oxidative drugs and infections (usually
viral, but also septicaemia, malaria and pneumonia).
• Drugs producing methaemoglobinaemia, such as nitroprusside and
prilocaine, are contraindicated, as patients are unable to reduce
methaemoglobin, thereby diminishing the O- carrying capacity.
2
• Ingestion of broad (fava) beans results in haemolysis (favism).
• Usually haemolysis of red cells occurs 2– 5d after exposure, causing
anaemia, haemoglobinaemia, abdominal pain, haemoglobinuria and
jaundice.
• Demonstration of Heinz bodies and red cell G6PD assay are diagnostic,
but G6PD levels may be falsely raised or normal in acute haemolysis.
• Signs and symptoms include: headache, breathlessness, nausea,
tachycardia, fatigue and cyanosis.
• Treatment includes discontinuation of the offending agent, and
transfusion may be required.
• Anaesthetic management should focus on avoiding drugs that cause
oxidative stress or can induce methaemoglobinaemia (Table 11.2).2
There are circumstances where clinical necessity may outweigh the
potential risk of drug administration, but this should be considered with
expert advice and careful observation for the signs and symptoms of
methaemoglobinaemia.
• Pain- induced stress can cause haemolysis, so ensure good pain relief.
Thalassaemias
Thalassaemias are due to absent or deficient synthesis of α- or β- globin
chains of Hb. The severity of these disorders is related to the degree of
impaired globin synthesis.
• The hallmark of β- thalassaemia is anaemia presenting in the 1st year
of life.
• α- thalassaemia is more commonly associated with hydrops fetalis.

--- Page 285 ---

264
264 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
• Diagnosis is confirmed by Hb electrophoresis and/ or globin chain
analysis.
• The disease is prevalent in people of Mediterranean (mainly β), African
(β and non- deletional α), and Asian (deletional α) ethnicity.
• Regardless of the underlying chain involved, thalassaemia is classified as
major, intermediate, or minor.
• Those with thalassaemia major are transfusion- dependent.
• Iron from transfused blood builds up in the reticuloendothelial system,
until it is saturated, when iron is deposited in parenchymal tissues,
principally the liver, pancreas, endocrine system and heart.
• Preoperative assessment of the degree of major organ impairment
(heart, liver, pancreas, endocrine) due to iron overload.
• High- output heart failure with intravascular volume overload is common
in severe anaemia. Treat preoperatively by cautious transfusion to
correct anaemia and minimise further overload.
• Previous transfusion exposure may cause antibody production, and
therefore X- matching may be delayed.
The hyperplastic bone marrow of the major thalassaemias may cause over-
growth and deformity of the facial bones and difficult intubation; this is less
common with current management.
Table 11.2 Drug safety in patients with G6PD
Safe Controversial/ Unsafe
uncertain
Bupivacaine Paracetamol Alfentanil Aspirin (high dose)
Glycopyrronium Pethidine Aspirin Diclofenac
bromide Phenytoin (low dose) Diazepam
Halothane Propofol Fentanyl Gentamicin
Heparin Rocuronium Isoflurane Lidocaine
Ibuprofen Suxamethonium Metronidazole Methylthioninium
Ketamine Thiopental Midazolam chloride (methylene
Mannitol Tramadol Penicillin blue)
NO Prilocaine Metoclopramide
2
Neostigmine Remifentanil eMLA® cream
Sevoflurane Quinolones
Vitamin K Sulfonamide
antibiotics
Source: data from: Foedinger A, Luger TJ. (2016) Glucose-6 - phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency Anästh Intensivmed 57:S115– 38. M https://www.ai-online.info/images/
ai-ausgabe/2016/04-2016/orphan-supplement-6-2016/2016_4_S123-S136_Supplement%20
Nr.%206%20-%202016%20-%20Glucose-6-phosphate%20dehydrogenase%20deficiency.pdf.

--- Page 286 ---

DISORDeRS OF COAGULATION 265
Disorders of coagulation
(For regional anaesthesia and coagulation abnormalities, see % p. 1110.)
The classic description of the clotting cascade was initially proposed in
1964 by Macfarlane and was generally accepted for over 50y. This histor-
ical description involves two pathways, an extrinsic pathway and an intrinsic
pathway, that both converge on a common pathway which leads to the for-
mation of a fibrin clot. Both pathways are complex and involve sequential
proteolytic activation of proenzymes by plasma proteases (clotting factors),
resulting in the formation of thrombin, which then splits the fibrinogen mol-
ecule into fibrin monomers.
With further advances in the knowledge of in vivo blood coagulation, a
cell- based model of coagulation was developed, proposing that coagulation
takes place on different cell surfaces in four overlapping steps:
• Initiation
• Amplification
• Propagation
• Termination.
The cell- based model allows a more thorough understanding of how coagu-
lation works in vivo and sheds light on the pathophysiological mechanism for
certain coagulation disorders. Congenital disorders of clotting may not be
present until challenged by trauma or surgery in adult life.
• Acquired disorders are due to d synthesis of coagulation factors,
i consumption (e.g. DIC, massive blood loss) and i production of
substances that interfere with factor function.
• A family history may be elicited— haemophilia A and B (sex- linked
recessive), von Willebrand’s disease (autosomal dominant with variable
penetrance)—b ut cannot be relied upon. Family history is absent in 30%
of haemophilia cases.
• Response to previous haemostatic challenges (tonsillectomy, dental
extractions) may indicate the severity of the coagulopathy; for
example, in severe haemophilia A (factor VIII <2%), bleeding occurs
spontaneously; in mild haemophilia A (factor VIII 5–3 0%), bleeding
occurs only after trauma.
• Concurrent and past medical problems, such as liver disease,
malabsorption (vitamin K deficiency), infection, malignancy (DIC) and
autoimmune disease (SLe, RA), as well as medications (anticoagulants,
aspirin and NSAIDs), may be relevant.
• Abnormalities due to liver disease and vitamin K deficiency; give
daily vitamin K (phytomenadione) 10mg IV slowly. FFP (15mL/k g)
may be needed, in addition, if the presenting symptom is bleeding.
Coagulation tests may be misleading in the presence of liver disease,
overemphasising the bleeding risk; consider using TeG® to evaluate the
true underlying coagulopathy.3
For blood test results in common coagulation disorders, see Table 11.3.

--- Page 287 ---

266
266 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Table 11.3 Blood results in common coagulation disorders
Disorder Platelet INR APTT TT Fibrinogen Other
count
Haemophilia A Normal Normal i Normal Normal d VIII
Haemophilia B Normal Normal i Normal Normal d IX
von Willebrand’s Normal Normal i Normal Normal d VIII,
disease (usually) vWF, i
bleeding
time
Liver disease Normal i i Normal Normal d V
or d or d
Vitamin K Normal i i Normal Normal d II, VII,
deficiency IX, X
DIC Normal i i i Normal i FDPs,
or d or d D- dimers
d II, V, VIII
Massive d i i Normal Normal Normal
transfusion or i or d FDPs
Heparin (un- Normal Normal i i Normal i anti- Xa
fractionated) (rarely or i
d)
Heparin Normal Normal Normal Normal Normal i anti- Xa
(LMWH) (rarely
d)
Warfarin Normal i i Normal Normal d II, VII,
IX, X
Lupus Normal Normal i Normal Normal DRVVT
anticoagulant or i +ve,
cardiolipin
antibody
APTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation;
DRVVT, dilute Russell’s viper venom time; FDPs, fibrin degradation products; INR, inter-
national normalised ratio; LMWH, low- molecular weight heparin; TT, thrombin time; vWF, von
Willebrand factor.

--- Page 288 ---

HAeMOPHILIA AND ReLATeD DISORDeRS 267
Haemophilia and related disorders
Inherited disorders of blood coagulation include:
• Haemophilia A (X- linked defect in factor VIII activity)
• Haemophilia B (X- linked defect in factor IX)
• von Willebrand’s disease (types 1 and 2 are autosomal dominant; type 3
is autosomal recessive).
Haematological advice should always be sought.
• Untreated mild haemophilia requires strenuous effort to avoid blood
products.
• Desmopressin infusion of 0.3 micrograms/ kg in 50– 100mL of 0.9%
sodium chloride over 30min, with the use of tranexamic acid, can be
used for mild disease or where there is low risk of bleeding.
• If possible, factor levels should be measured prior to surgery and should
be 50– 100% of normal and maintained for 2– 7d post- procedure.
• If factors are necessary, the treatment of choice is now recombinant
factor concentrate, in accordance with established guidelines.
• Cryoprecipitate (contains factor VIII) and FFP (contains factor IX)
should be used to correct these clotting factors only in an emergency or
if concentrate is unavailable.
• NSAIDs, other anticoagulants, antiplatelet drugs and IM injections
should be avoided.
• von Willebrand’s disease is divided into four subtypes: types 1, 2 and
3, and platelet type. Type 2 has four subtypes 2A, 2B, 2M and 2N.
Desmopressin is given prior to surgical procedures in types 1 and 2A. It
works by stimulating the release of von Willebrand factor (vWF) from
endothelial cells. A rise in vWF is seen 30– 60min after the infusion and
maintained for about 6h.
• Desmopressin should not be given to type 2B because of
thrombocytopenia and thrombotic complications. Desmopressin is not
effective in types 2M and 2N.
• The treatment of choice for patients who are non- responders to
desmopressin is virus- inactivated factor VIII concentrate of intermediate
purity.
• Haematologists may now advise treatment with recombinant vWF
marketed under the name Vonvendi®.

--- Page 289 ---

268
268 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Thrombocytopenia
Defined as a platelet count <150 × 109/ L.
• Spontaneous bleeding is uncommon, until the count is < 20 × 109/ L.
Causes of thrombocytopenia include:
• Failure of platelet production: selective (hereditary, drugs, alcohol,
viral infection) or general marrow failure (aplasia, cytotoxic drugs,
radiotherapy, infiltration, fibrosis, myelodysplasia, megaloblastic
anaemia)
• i platelet consumption: with an immune basis (idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), drugs, viral infections, SLe,
lymphoproliferative disorders) or without an immune basis (DIC, TTP,
cardiopulmonary bypass)
• Dilution, following massive transfusion of stored blood
• Splenic pooling (hypersplenism).
Preoperative preparation
Unexplained thrombocytopenia should be investigated before elective
surgery, as the appropriate precautions will be determined by the
underlying cause.
• Minor procedures may be performed without platelet support,
provided adequate pressure is applied to the wound.
• For invasive procedures such as central line insertion, transbronchial
biopsy, liver biopsy or laparotomy, platelets should be >50 × 109/ L.
• For epidural or spinal anaesthesia, a platelet count of 80 × 109/ L is
adequate (see % p. 841).
• For operations in critical sites, such as the brain or eyes, the platelet
count should be raised to 100 × 109/ L.
• In ITP, platelet transfusions should be reserved for major haemorrhage,
since platelet survival is extremely short- lived. Preparation for surgery
entails the use of steroids or high- dose immunoglobulins initially.
• In TTP, platelets are relatively contraindicated. Treatment should consist
of plasma or plasma exchange, steroids and, where platelets >50 ×
109/ L, LMWH and aspirin.4
Postoperative management
If microvascular bleeding continues, despite a platelet count of >50 × 109/
L, suspect DIC. If confirmed by coagulation tests, give FFP and cryoprecipi-
tate, as appropriate.
• IM injections, aspirin and NSAIDs should be avoided.
• Desmopressin 0.3 micrograms/ kg in 50– 100mL of 0.9% sodium
chloride over 30min may improve platelet function in renal failure.

--- Page 290 ---

ANTICOAGULANTS 269
Anticoagulants
Anticoagulants are used to reduce thromboembolic risk. However, in pa-
tients requiring surgery, they i the risk of major bleeding. It is important
to know the indication for anticoagulation and weigh the risk of VTe if it is
stopped vs the risk of significant bleeding if it is continued.
The commonest indications for anticoagulation are AF, mechanical heart
valves, previous VTe, thrombophilia, cancer or other prothrombotic state.
Of these, AF is the commonest. Based on current evidence, patients are
now treated with a broad range of anticoagulants based on their own in-
dividual risk factors. Direct oral anticoagulants are now generally favoured
over warfarin.5 A meta- analysis of 12 studies in 2015 showed an overall
improvement in CVe prevention, a reduction in intracranial haemorrhage
and a reduction in mortality when direct oral anticoagulants were used,
compared to warfarin, for patients with AF and one other risk factor.6 They
also require no monitoring, unlike warfarin.
A word about terminology CHeST guidelines 20167 refer to non- vitamin
K antagonist oral anticoagulants as NOACs, however there are
other interpretations of this acronym. The International Society of
Thrombosis and Haemostasis and the Association of Anaesthetists
use the term direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs). These drugs are also
referred to as TSOACs (target-specific oral anticoagulants).
CHA
2
DS
2
- VASc
AF increases a patient’s risk of CVe and the CHADS-V ASc score is used to
2 2
quantify this risk (Table 11.4). It is used to inform the discussion regarding the
risks and benefits of long-t erm anticoagulation. Patients are scored 0–9 . The
score is also an indication of annual CVe risk (e.g. score of 1 = annual CVe
risk 1.3%; score of 4 = annual CVe risk 4%; score of 9 = annual CVe risk of
15.2%). Anticoagulation should be considered in anyone with a score of ≥1
(except when the only risk factor is ♀ sex), although antiplatelets may suffice
with scores ≤2. A balanced decision for treatment must also include assess-
ment of the patient’s annual risk of a major bleed 2° to the anticoagulation.
Perioperative risk
Weighing up the risks of stopping anticoagulation or not requires know-
ledge of the surgery and how likely major or significant blood loss is, as well
as a calculation of the patient’s thrombotic risk.
Surgical bleeding risk is divided into:
• Low risk (e.g. dental and minor skin procedures)
• Moderate risk (e.g. general surgery, joint replacement, genitourinary or
maxillofacial surgery)
• High risk, both of bleeding or bleeding into an enclosed space (cardiac,
complex general, vascular, posterior chamber ophthalmic, spinal and
intracranial surgery).

--- Page 291 ---

270
270 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Table 11.4 CHA 2 DS 2 - VASc score
Condition Points
C Congestive heart failure (or LV systolic dysfunction) 1
H Hypertension: BP consistently above 140/ 90mmHg (or treated 1
hypertension on medication)
A Age ≥75y 2
2
D Diabetes mellitus 1
S Prior CVe or transient ischaemic attack or thromboembolism 2
2
V Vascular disease (e.g. peripheral artery disease, myocardial 1
infarction, aortic plaque)
A Age 65– 74 1
Sc ♀ sex 1
Reprinted from Chest, 137, Lip G, Refining clinical risk stratification for predicting stroke and
thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation using a novel risk factor-b ased approach: the euro Heart
Survey on atrial fibrillation, 263– 72, Copyright © 2010, with permission from The American
College of Chest Physicians. Published by elsevier Inc.
evidence for perioperative bleeding risk in patients on antithrombotic
therapy is limited. Individual assessment based on the surgery, surgical ex-
pertise and patient risk factors should be made.
• Thrombotic risk can be difficult to calculate due to the many
indications for anticoagulation. Table 11.5 shows a risk stratification for
perioperative thromboembolism.6,8
Table 11.5 Risk stratification for perioperative thromboembolism
Risk category Mechanical heart AF VTE
valve
High Any mitral valve CHA 2 DS 2 - VASc VTe within 3mo
prosthesis or score of ≥6 Severe
caged- ball or tilting Rheumatic thrombophilia*
disc aortic valve valvular disease
prosthesis
Intermediate Bileaflet aortic valve CHA 2 DS 2 - VASc VTe
prosthesis + ≥1 score of 4– 5 within 3– 12mo
of the following: CVe or TIA Non- severe
AF, CVe, TIA, >3mo ago thrombophilia**
hypertension, DM, Recurrent VTe
congestive heart
Active cancer
failure, age >75y
Low Bileaflet aortic valve CHA 2 DS 2 - VASc VTe >12mo ago with
score of ≤3 no other risk factors
* Severe thrombophilia is defined as deficiency in protein C, protein S or antithrombin; antibodies
and those with multiple abnormalities.
** Non- severe thrombophilia is defined as heterozygous for factor V Leiden or prothrombin gene
mutation.
Source: data from Hornor MA, et al. American College of Surgeons' Guidelines for the
Perioperative Management of Antithrombotic Medication. J Am Coll Surg. 2018;227:521–36 and
Douketis JD, et al. Perioperative management of antithrombotic therapy, Chest 2012;141:
e326S–e350S.

--- Page 292 ---

ANTICOAGULANTS 271
As a general rule, the risk from a major perioperative bleeding event is likely
to be less than that from thrombosis. Consider, for example, that the risk
of major bleeding on antithrombotic agents is estimated at 6–1 0%, whereas
the mortality associated with:8
• embolic CVe is 37%
• Mechanical heart valve thrombosis is 17.5%
• VTe (DVT or Pe ) is 5–1 0%.
Fig. 11.2 illustrates perioperative management of a warfarinised patient
relative to surgical bleeding risk and their risk of VTe.
Assess bleeding risk of the
operation∗
Low Intermediate High
risk risk risk
As for high thrombotic risk
Assess thrombotic Start intravenous unfractionated
risk heparin on day before surgery
Stop 6 h before surgery
Continue Restart intravenous unfractionated
warfarin if INR is heparin once haemostasis secured
in range
Low risk Intermediate risk High risk
Stop warfarin 4–5 days Stop warfarin 4–5 days Stop warfarin 4–5 days
before surgery before surgery before surgery
Use prophylactic dose of Use prophylactic dose of Use treatment dose of
LMWH as indicated by LMWH 2 days before LMWH 2 days before
thrombotic nature of surgery surgery
procedure Stop LMWH before Last LMWH dose 24 h
Restart warfarin on surgery before surgery
day of procedure Restart warfarin on Restart warfarin on
day of the procedure evening of day of
Restart LMWH once surgery
haemostasis is adequate Restart LMWH when
haemostasis adequate.
Consider prophylactic
dose 12 h after operation
Fig. 11.2 Perioperative management of anticoagulation based on risk
assessment. Reproduced with permission from Thachil J et al. Management of surgical patients
receiving anticoagulation and antiplatelet agents. British Journal of Surgery 2008;95:1437–48.
Copyright © 2008 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

--- Page 293 ---

272
272 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
• If using continuous IV infusion (IVI) of UFH for patients with a high risk
of bleeding, start at 1000 units/ h and adjust to keep the APTT between
1.5 and 2.5 (Fig. 11.2).
• Direct oral anticoagulants do not require bridging, but timing of the last
preoperative dose is variable and covered later in the chapter.
• It is worth noting that the perioperative risk of arterial
thromboembolism in patients who have AF and no anticoagulation
is 71%.
• Perioperatively, additional methods of VTe prophylaxis should be
considered (e.g. compression stockings and pumps) in all patients at risk
of VTe despite anticoagulation (see % pp. 59–61).
Timing of surgery
Consider whether the surgery can be delayed in order to reduce the risk of
VTe and associated morbidity and mortality.
• Prematurely stopping anticoagulation after VTe within the 1st month
confers an estimated 30d risk of recurrent VTe of 40%. This falls to an
annual risk of 15% after 3mo.
• Vena cava filters should be considered in patients who have had VTe
<4w ago and require interruption of their anticoagulation or in whom
postoperative anticoagulation may be delayed >12h.
Warfarin
Warfarin, a vitamin K antagonist, was the original anticoagulant used in
patients with AF and remains the only treatment with established safety
for patients with AF and rheumatic heart disease and/o r mechanical heart
valve prosthesis.
• Warfarin results in synthesis of non- functional vitamin K- dependent
factors (II, VII, IX and X, proteins C and S), prolonging PT, but may take
up to 48h to become effective.
• Warfarin is highly effective but has a narrow therapeutic window,
requiring regular testing and dose adjustment.
• Warfarin is associated with haemorrhagic CVe, and intracranial and GI
haemorrhage.
• The INR compares a patient’s PT to a control, indicating the degree of
anticoagulation.
• It reduces the risk of CVe by 67% and mortality by 25%, compared with
control (aspirin or no therapy).
• Once the INR is <2, alternative pre- and postoperative prophylaxis
should be considered.
Recommended INR targets
• INR 2– 2.5 for prophylaxis of DVT
• INR 2.5 for treatment of DVT/ Pe, prophylaxis in AF and
cardioversion
• INR 3.5 for recurrent DVT/ Pe or mechanical heart valves
The effects of warfarin can be reversed in a number of ways, dependent
on the urgency.

--- Page 294 ---

ANTICOAGULANTS 273
• If no bleeding and INR <5, reducing or omitting a dose is usually
sufficient, but if INR 5– 9, 1– 2mg vitamin K PO should also be given.
• If there is minor bleeding or a grossly raised INR >9, give 2–5 mg
vitamin K PO or IV.
• For emergency surgery or life- threatening bleeding, specialist
haematological advice should be sought. Prothrombin complex
concentrates (PCCs) have replaced FFP as 1st- line treatment. The dose
varies, depending on the initial INR. PCC (e.g. Octaplex® or Beriplex®)
is a pooled blood product and prothrombotic, and can be associated
with DIC. Vitamin K 10mg should also be given as a slow IV injection.
Where PCC is not available, then 10– 15mL/k g FFP can be given,
although it is not quite as effective.
The important anaesthetic interactions with warfarin include:
• Potentiation (by inhibition of metabolism): alcohol, amiodarone,
cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, co-t rimoxazole, erythromycin, indometacin,
metronidazole, omeprazole, paracetamol
• Inhibition (by induction of metabolism): barbiturates, carbamazepine.
Drugs that affect platelet function can increase the risk of warfarin- associ-
ated bleeding, e.g. aspirin and NSAIDs.
Heparin (UFH and LMWH)
A parenterally active anticoagulant that potentiates antithrombin, which, in
turn, inactivates thrombin and factor Xa, along with other proteases.
• Used for prophylaxis and treatment of thromboembolism.
• Heparin is a polymer of variable length. Available as UFH or LMWH
which has undergone fractionation to make the effects more
predictable.
• Common LMWHs include dalteparin, enoxaparin and tinzaparin. Doses
can vary, depending on renal function and body weight.
• Suggested daily SC doses for surgical VTe prophylaxis in high-r isk adults
>50kg, eGFR >30mL/ min/ 1.73m2: tinzaparin 4500 units, dalteparin
5000 units, enoxaparin 40mg.
• Heparin is metabolised in the liver and renally excreted. Use caution
with LMWH in patients with renal failure.
• Complications of heparin include heparin- induced thrombocytopenia
(HIT), which can cause serious venous and arterial thrombosis. Patients
on UFH for 5d or more should have their platelet counts checked. This
is less of a problem with LMWH.
• UFH is given by IV bolus or IVI. It is monitored by prolongation of
APTT (maintain at 1.5– 2.5 times the normal laboratory value). It has a
narrow therapeutic window with complex pharmacokinetics and great
interpatient variation in dose requirements. Half-l ife is 1– 2h.
• A validated regime is to give a bolus of 80 units/ kg, followed by an
infusion of 18 units/ kg/h , checking the 1st APTT after 6h.
• Protamine is used to reverse both UFH and LMWH; however, the
neutralising effect of protamine on the inhibition of factor Xa is 95%
for UFH, but only 55% for LMWH. It should be given slowly to avoid
hypotension.
• Reversal of UFH: if given within 15min of UFH, 1mg of protamine IV
neutralises 100 units of UFH. After this, less protamine is required, as
heparin is rapidly excreted.

--- Page 295 ---

274
274 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
• Reversal of LMWH: 1mg of protamine is given per 1mg of enoxaparin
or 100 units of dalteparin. Halve the dose if >8h since administration.
• LMWH has largely replaced UFH for both prophylaxis and treatment of
thromboembolism and unstable CAD. Administered once daily by SC
injection, it needs no monitoring (although antifactor Xa levels can be
measured in renal failure).
Direct oral anticoagulants
Direct thrombin (factor IIa) inhibitors
Direct thrombin inhibitors were developed to overcome some of the limi-
tations of the indirect thrombin inhibitors (UFH and LMWH).
• They offer a predictable response as protein binding is minimal.
• They also do not cause HIT.
They are divided into: univalent—b inding only to the catalytic (active) site
of thrombin; and bivalent—b inding to both the catalytic site and a 2nd site,
exocite- 1.9
Univalent direct thrombin inhibitors: argatroban and dabigatran
• Argatroban binds reversibly to thrombin. Given IV, its plasma half-l ife is
39– 51min and it undergoes hepatic metabolism to inactive metabolites.
Approved for prophylaxis or treatment of thrombosis in patients with
HIT, and as an anticoagulant in patients with or at risk of HIT requiring
PCI. Monitored via APTT.
• Dabigatran is administered PO. It is licensed for extended VTe
prophylaxis after hip and knee replacement surgery, and to reduce the
risk of CVe and systemic embolism in patients with non-v alvular AF.
Bivalent direct thrombin inhibitors: hirudin and bivalirudin
• Hirudin, originally isolated from saliva of the medicinal leech, binds
irreversibly to thrombin. It has a plasma half- life of 60min if given IV
(120min if given SC) and is renally excreted. APTT is used to monitor
the effect, aiming for 1.5– 2.5 times normal. It is approved for treatment
of arterial and venous thromboembolism complicated by HIT and as an
alternative to heparin for CPB surgery.
• Bivalirudin is a reversible thrombin inhibitor. Peak plasma levels are
reached after 15– 20min IV administration. Half- life is 730min, with
80% eliminated by plasma enzymes and 20% by renal excretion.
Monitored by activated clotting time (ACT).9 Reversal in emergency is
by recombinant factor VIIa, FFP and cryoprecipitate (or fibrinogen) or
modified ultrafiltration. It is approved for use in coronary angioplasty.
Direct factor Xa inhibitors
• Anticoagulants acting directly on factor X, which can be given PO and
have rapid onset and offset.
• They inactivate both circulating and clot- bound Xa.
• There is no need to monitor drug effect, although antifactor Xa assay
can be used if needed.
• examples include apixaban, rivaroxaban and edoxaban.

--- Page 296 ---

ANTICOAGULANTS 275
Indirect factor Xa inhibitor
• Fondaparinux is a synthetic inhibitor of factor Xa, which can be
given PO or IV. Monitoring is not required, but since it is excreted
largely unchanged, the dose should be altered in renal failure. APTT
may be altered but is not a true reflection of action. It is licensed
for prophylaxis of VTe in immobilised medical patients, after joint
replacement or abdominal surgery and in the treatment of DVT and Pe
or acute coronary syndrome. Usual dose is 2.5mg SC for surgical VTe
prophylaxis after major orthopaedic surgery.
Reversal of direct oral anticoagulants
If there is minor bleeding or no bleeding, just discontinue the agent. If there
is major haemorrhage, specific reversal agents can be used (see Table 11.6),
but also consider:
• Activated charcoal (only within 3h of ingestion)
• Dialysis for dabigatran
• 4- factor PCC which contains factors II, VII, IX and X
• Recombinant factor VIIa
• Tranexamic acid.
Idarucizumab is used for reversal of dabigatran; it is a humanised mono-
clonal antibody fragment that binds specifically to dabigatran and its me-
tabolites, thereby reversing the anticoagulant effect. Full reversal dose is
5g (+ 5g if a 2nd dose is required). Dabigatran can be restarted after 24h.
Andexanet alfa is used for reversal of apixaban and rivaroxaban.
Andexanet alfa is a recombinant form of human factor Xa protein which
binds specifically to apixaban or rivaroxaban. At the time of writing, this
product is not yet licensed in the UK.

--- Page 297 ---

276
276 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Table 11.6 Summary of direct oral anticoagulant characteristics
Apixaban Rivaroxaban Edoxaban Dabigatran
Dose (normal renal 5mg twice 20mg once 30– 60mg 150mg once daily
function) daily daily once daily*
Action Direct Direct factor Direct Direct thrombin
factor Xa Xa inhibitor factor Xa inhibitor
inhibitor inhibitor
CVe prevention in Q Q Q Q
non- valvular AF
VTe prevention and Q Q Q
treatment
Prophylaxis after Q
acute coronary
syndrome or CAD
Half- life (h) 12 5– 13 10– 14 12– 17
Reversal with 4- Q Q Q Q
factor PCC
Specialist reversal Andexanet Andexanet No Idarucizumab
available alfa alfa
Last dose before CC ≥30mL/ min, stop for 24h CC ≥80mL/
operation: low risk CC 15– 29mL/ min, stop for 36h min, stop
of bleeding (NICe for 24h
guidance 2020**) CC 50– 79,
stop for 48h
CC 30– 49,
stop for 72h
Last dose before Stop for 48h CC ≥80mL/
operation: high risk min, stop
of bleeding (NICe for 48h
guidance 2020**) CC 50– 79,
stop for 72h
CC 30– 49,
stop for 96h
CC, creatinine clearance.
* Dose dependent on patient weight.
** NICe guidance on oral anticoagulation, updated January 2020. M https:// cks.nice.org.uk/
anticoagulation- oral

--- Page 298 ---

ANTIPLATeLeT DRUGS 277
Antiplatelet drugs
Antiplatelet drugs decrease platelet aggregation and inhibit thrombus for-
mation in the arterial circulation where anticoagulants have little effect.
Their indications include 1° or 2° prevention of CVe and CVS disease.
There are now many antiplatelet medications available, some of which are
summarised in Table 11.7.10
Aspirin
Aspirin irreversibly acetylates the active site of cyclo- oxygenase (COX) 1
(2 at higher doses), which blocks the production of thromboxane A2, a
powerful promoter of platelet aggregation. Recovery of platelet function
requires formation of new platelets. Low-d ose aspirin is a mainstay for 2°
prevention of thrombotic vascular events in vascular and cardiac disease.
Also used in angina, post- coronary artery bypass surgery, intermittent clau-
dication, AF and 1° prevention of IHD. Once stopped, it takes around 7–
9d for platelet function to return to normal. This risk of bleeding must be
balanced against the possibility of precipitating a thromboembolic event,
particularly in patients with unstable angina.
Dipyridamole
A nucleoside transport and phosphodiesterase inhibitor, dipyridamole is an
antiplatelet and a vasodilator. It is used in 2° prevention of CVe or with
low- dose aspirin for post- coronary artery surgery and valve replacement. It
has an elimination half- life of 10h. There is variability in the literature as to
when, if at all, dipyridamole needs to be stopped prior to surgery. The AoA
states that it does not need to be stopped at all prior to regional blocks, but
other sources recommend it should be stopped anywhere from 24h to 7d.
Check your local policy.
Adenosine diphosphate/ P2Y
12
inhibitors
P2y is the chemoreceptor responsible for adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
12
stimulation of the glycoprotein IIb/I IIa receptor. Stimulation of IIb/I IIa re-
ceptors leads to enhanced platelet degranulation, thromboxane release
and prolonged platelet aggregation. Antagonism of the P2y receptor may
12
be irreversible with clopidogrel or prasugrel, or reversible with ticagrelor
or cangrelor. Often used with aspirin as DAPT for acute coronary syn-
drome, but also after PCI, CABG, AF in patients unable or unwilling to
take anticoagulants, CVe (not prasugrel) and peripheral vascular disease.
Clopidogrel remains the commonest agent, but guidelines are continu-
ally being revised. Recent evidence suggests that prasugrel and ticagrelor
may be more effective than clopidogrel, but with a higher risk of bleeding.
Cangrelor is given IV and may be an option for patients requiring PCI who
have not been loaded with oral therapy.
Glycoprotein IIb/ IIIa inhibitors
These medications compete with fibrinogen and vWF for IIb/ IIIa receptors.
They prevent both platelet crosslinking and platelet-d erived thrombus for-
mation. They are all given IV and are potent inhibitors of platelet activity.
Abciximab is a large monoclonal antibody with a high affinity for binding
to the glycoprotein IIb/ IIIa receptor. It has the longest duration of action
and has a UK licence as an adjunct to aspirin and UFH in PCI. While its
biological half-l ife is 12– 24h, due to slow clearance, its functional half-l ife is

--- Page 299 ---

278
278 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
up to 7d, so it must be stopped 1w prior to elective surgery. eptifibatide
and tirofiban both have a rapid onset of action and a short half-l ife and are
used to prevent early MI in unstable angina and non- ST- elevation myocar-
dial infarction. Significant recovery of platelet aggregation is seen 4h after
infusion is stopped and therefore, they only need to be stopped 4–8 h be-
fore elective surgery.
Epoprostenol
epoprostenol is prostacyclin or prostaglandin I prepared in drug form. It
2
is a potent peripheral and pulmonary vasodilator, as well as an antiplatelet
medication. It is used in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension, and in
haemodialysis where heparin is contraindicated. It is given by IVI and has a
short half- life.
Perioperative management of antiplatelet drugs
Perioperative management of patients on antiplatelet therapy requires:
• Understanding the indication
• Timing of index event (i.e. CVe, MI, PCI)
• Risk of stent thrombosis
• Consequences of delaying surgery
• Risk of surgical bleeding.
Monotherapy
Continuation of aspirin monotherapy is widely accepted, unless surgery has
a risk of major blood loss (e.g. CABG and transurethral prostatectomy) or
risk of bleeding in confined space (posterior chamber ophthalmic, spinal
and intracranial surgery). If in doubt, ask the surgeon. If aspirin needs to be
stopped, the last dose should be 7d prior to surgery.
Dual antiplatelet therapy
With the increase in 1° PCI and coronary stenting, DAPT has become com-
monplace, often with aspirin and clopidogrel. After placement of a coronary
stent, antiplatelet drugs are required to prevent late in- stent thrombosis.
BMS only require DAPT for 6w, compared to the older-g eneration DeS
which require 12mo. The european Society of Cardiology now suggests
that a patient’s bleeding and thrombosis risk should be assessed on an indi-
vidual basis and newer- generation DeS may only require DAPT for as little
as 6mo to >12mo.11,12
Wherever possible, it is recommended to complete the full course
of DAPT prior to elective non- cardiac surgery. early discontinuation of
antiplatelet therapy is the most significant determinant of stent thrombosis,
which can have a mortality of up to 50%. If surgery must occur while the
patient is on DAPT, consider if it needs to be stopped. If there is a low
risk of bleeding, it is often possible to continue DAPT. In surgical proced-
ures where DAPT must be stopped, it may be possible to stop the P2y
12
inhibitor, but continue aspirin monotherapy perioperatively. Patients with
a high risk of bleeding perioperatively will need to stop DAPT. Stopping
DAPT and starting parenteral glycoprotein IIb/ IIIa inhibitors in the peri-
operative period has been proposed in patients with high thrombotic risk,
and some centres may advocate bridging with heparin. If a patient must have
surgery while on DAPT, then liaison with both the surgeon and physician
responsible for starting the DAPT (usually the cardiologist) is paramount.

--- Page 300 ---

ANTIPLATeLeT DRUGS 279
Management of intraoperative bleeding
TeG®, rotational thromboelastometry (ROTeM®) and Platelet Mapping
Assays may be helpful in guiding management. Acute bleeding associated
with antiplatelet medications can be partially treated with platelet transfu-
sion, but free drug may continue to inhibit the transfused platelet function.
Consider FFP, cryoprecipitate, recombinant factor VII and (with little evi-
dence) desmopressin.
Restarting antiplatelet drugs
Antiplatelet drugs should be restarted as soon as possible, guided by the
surgeon and their assessment of the risk of bleeding.
Table 11.7 Summary of antiplatelet medication
Aspirin ClopidogrelPrasugrel Ticagrelor AbciximabEpo-
prostenol
Mechanism COX- 1 ADP ADP ADP Glyco- Prosta-
of action inhibition receptor receptor receptor protein glandin I
2
antagonist antagonist antagonist IIb/ IIIa inhibits
receptor thrombo-
inhibitor xane A2
Half- life 15– 30min 7– 9h 7h 7– 9h 10– 15min <6min
Typical 300mg 300– 60mg 180mg 0.25mg/ None
loading 600mg kg
dose*
Typical 75– 75mg 5– 10mg 90mg bd 0.125mg/ 4ng/ kg/
daily main- 300mg kg/ min min
tenance
dose*
Time to 30% at 40% at 3d 2– 3d 57% at 12h <30min
recover 48h 24h
platelet
function
after
stopping
drug
Route of PO PO PO PO IV IVI
administra-
tion
* Dosing may vary, depending on age, weight and renal function.
Source: data from Oprea AD, et al. Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy, British
Journal of Anaesthesia, 111(1) 2013, i3– 17.

### Table
| Table 11.7 Summary of antiplatelet medication |
| --- |
| Aspirin ClopidogrelPrasugrel Ticagrelor AbciximabEpo-
prostenol |
| Mechanism COX- 1 ADP ADP ADP Glyco- Prosta-
of action inhibition receptor receptor receptor protein glandin I
2
antagonist antagonist antagonist IIb/ IIIa inhibits
receptor thrombo-
inhibitor xane A2
Half- life 15– 30min 7– 9h 7h 7– 9h 10– 15min <6min
Typical 300mg 300– 60mg 180mg 0.25mg/ None
loading 600mg kg
dose*
Typical 75– 75mg 5– 10mg 90mg bd 0.125mg/ 4ng/ kg/
daily main- 300mg kg/ min min
tenance
dose*
Time to 30% at 40% at 3d 2– 3d 57% at 12h <30min
recover 48h 24h
platelet
function
after
stopping
drug
Route of PO PO PO PO IV IVI
administra-
tion |
| * Dosing may vary, depending on age, weight and renal function.
Source: data from Oprea AD, et al. Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy, British
Journal of Anaesthesia, 111(1) 2013, i3– 17. |

--- Page 301 ---

280
280 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Fibrinolytic drugs
These drugs act as thrombolytics by activating plasminogen to plasmin; this
degrades fibrin and therefore dissolves thrombi.
• Newer drugs, such as reteplase and tenecteplase, are given by bolus
injection, making them ideal for early community injection.
• Alteplase (recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-P A)) and
streptokinase are given by continuous infusions.
• Used for AMI where benefits outweigh risks, e.g. when PCI not
available.
• Benefit greatest with early injection, eCG changes with ST-e levation or
new bundle branch block and anterior infarction.
• Alteplase, reteplase and streptokinase need to be given within 12h
of symptom onset, ideally within 1h; use after 12h requires specialist
advice. Tenecteplase should be given as early as possible and usually
within 6h of symptom onset.
• Should be used in combination with antithrombin (LMWH) and
antiplatelet (aspirin) therapy to reduce early reinfarction.
• Alteplase, streptokinase and urokinase can be used for other
thromboembolic disorders such as DVT and Pe. Alteplase is also used
for acute ischaemic CVe. Treatment must be started promptly.
• Contraindications include any risk of bleeding, especially trauma
(including prolonged CPR), recent surgery and GI tract and intracerebral
pathology.
• Streptokinase can cause allergic reactions and should be used only once.
Antibodies can inactivate the drug.
• Serious bleeding calls for the discontinuation of therapy and may require
coagulation factors. Cryoprecipitate (high levels of factor VIII and
fibrinogen) and FFP (factors V and VIII), as well as platelets, may all be
required. Antifibrinolytic drugs, such as aminocaproic acid or tranexamic
acid, may also be useful.
• Bleeding times are prolonged for up to 24h after these drugs. In
emergency surgery, reversal will be required.
• Urokinase is also licensed to restore the patency of occluded IV
catheters and cannulae blocked with fibrin clots. Inject directly into the
catheter or cannula 5000– 25 000 units dissolved in a suitable volume
of 0.9% sodium chloride to fill the catheter or cannula lumen; leave for
20– 60min, then aspirate the lysate; repeat, if necessary.

--- Page 302 ---

HAeMOSTATIC DRUG THeRAPy 281
Haemostatic drug therapy
Tranexamic acid (and aminocaproic acid)
Both these drugs are synthetic derivatives of the amino acid lysine and
reversibly bind to plasminogen, preventing its conversion to plasmin and
therefore its ability to cleave fibrin.
• Tranexamic acid is ten times more potent than aminocaproic acid.
• The CRASH 2 Trial13 found tranexamic acid to decrease the risk of
death in people who have significant bleeding due to trauma by 30% if
given within 3h from the initial trauma; 1g IV over 10min, followed by 1g
over the next 8h.
• The CRASH 3 Trial14 supports the use of tranexamic acid in traumatic
brain injury.
• Neither trial suggested an increase in vaso- occlusive events.
• Tranexamic acid is increasingly used to reduce surgical blood loss.
• Other uses include postoperative bleeding in prostatectomy and dental
extractions (particularly in haemophilia), cardiac and craniofacial surgery
and menstrual bleeding.
• Also useful in the reversal of thrombolytic drugs.
• Contraindicated in renal failure, epilepsy, benign gynaecological
interventions (e.g. myomectomy), following an acute VTe and
fibrinolysis due to DIC without any significant bleeding.
• Usual dose of tranexamic acid is 1g tds PO for relatively minor bleeding
such as menorrhagia or epistaxis.
• For surgical bleeding (or anticipated bleeding as in orthopaedic surgery,
e.g. total knee replacement), a typical dose would be 1g IV (or 10–
20mg/ kg) given prior to incision. A 2nd dose of 0.5– 1g IV may be given
postoperatively for continued bleeding.
Aprotinin
A serine protease inhibitor, it inhibits free plasmin (but not bound plasmin).
• The drug was temporarily withdrawn worldwide following the Blood
Conservation Using Antifibrinolytics in a Randomized Trial (BART)
trial15 after studies suggested that its use i the risk of complications or
death in cardiac surgery.15,16 In February 2012, the european Medicines
Agency (eMA) reverted its previous standpoint regarding aprotinin and
recommended that the suspension be lifted.
• The drug is still available— Nordic became the manufacturer in 2012.
• It is contraindicated for repeated use within a year due to anaphylaxis.
• It can cause renal failure and is contraindicated in renal insufficiency.
• The drug is useful during the anhepatic phase of liver transplantation
where its use is guided by TeG®.
Desmopressin
An analogue of arginine vasopressin which induces the release of vWF from
the vascular endothelium to increase both vWF and factor VIII.
• Can be used (0.3 micrograms/k g given in 50– 100mL of 0.9% sodium
chloride over 30min) for haemophilia A and von Willebrand’s disease to
double or quadruple the levels of vWF or factor VIII.
• Platelet function may also be improved in patients with renal failure and
aspirin- induced platelet dysfunction.

--- Page 303 ---

282
282 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Factor VIIa
Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) acts at the ‘tissue factor–f actor VIIa’ com-
plex at the site of endothelial damage.
• This effect appears localised to the area where the vessel is damaged,
leading to few systemic side effects.
• Numerous case reports have shown rFVIIa to have potent haemostatic
effects, even when other treatments have failed, regardless of the cause
of bleeding. Its use to stop bleeding during operations is off-l icence,
however. These potential benefits have to be weighed up against
its thrombogenic risk; a Cochrane review (updated February 2011)
concluded the data supporting the off- licence use of rFVIIa were weak,
and the use of rFVIIa outside its current licensed use—h aemophilia and
inhibitory alloantibodies and for prophylaxis and treatment of patients
with congenital factor VII deficiency— should be restricted to clinical
trials.
• Dosing and mode of delivery (IV bolus or continuous infusion) have still
not been established (20– 40 micrograms/ kg has been used).
Prothrombin complex concentrates
Dried prothrombin complex is prepared from human plasma and contains
factor IX, together with variable amounts of factors II, VII and X. Often
referred to as 4- factor PCC.
• Indications are treatment and prophylaxis of congenital or acquired
deficiency of factors II, VII, IX and X (such as during warfarin
treatment).
• Contraindications are angina, recent MI and history of HIT.
• Side effects include thrombosis and hypersensitivity, including
anaphylaxis.

--- Page 304 ---

DISSeMINATeD INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION 283
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
DIC occurs when a disease process disturbs normal haemostasis and leads
to abnormal coagulation and fibrinolysis within the vasculature. It is often
termed consumptive coagulopathy due to the extent of clot formation
‘using up’ clotting factors. Overactivation of coagulation leads to the pro-
duction of thrombi consisting of fibrin and platelets. Thrombi in the micro-
circulation and larger vessels lead to further clot formation. Fibrinolysis
follows, forming fibrin degradation products. end- organ damage can then
occur from hypoperfusion, thrombosis and/ or bleeding.
DIC may be acute or chronic. Chronic DIC occurs slowly, allowing
balance between consumption and regeneration of clotting products, and is
typically seen in malignancy (pancreatic, gastric, ovarian) and in patients with
haemangiomas, aneurysms and carcinomatosis. Acute DIC is seen with:
• Sepsis, often Gram-n egative bacteria
• Malignancy, e.g. acute promyelocytic leukaemia, mucinous tumours
(pancreatic, gastric, ovarian) and brain tumours. Cancer procoagulant is
a proteolytic enzyme capable of activating factor X
• Trauma, especially to CNS, or crush injuries
• Obstetric complications: pre- eclampsia, amniotic fluid embolism (AFe)
• Acute haemolytic transfusion reaction following ABO incompatibility.
Tissue factor release from monocytes plus generation of cytokines
(TNF, IL-1 ) and reduced nitric oxide (NO) lead to clot formation and
vasoconstriction.
• Fat embolism.
• Heat stroke and amphetamine overdose.
Presentation and diagnosis
Presentation of DIC can be in the form of bleeding, VTe and arterial throm-
bosis with organ failure, with renal, hepatic, lung, CNS and adrenal being
commonest.
Laboratory abnormalities are variable and non-s pecific, dependent on
the severity of the DIC. The following would support a diagnosis of DIC:
• i PT and APTT, thrombin time and D-d imer
• d platelets, fibrinogen, clotting factors VII, X, V and II, coagulation
inhibitors antithrombin III and proteins C and S
• Differential diagnosis typically presenting with thrombocytopenia,
but with otherwise normal coagulation studies, include other
microangiopathies (e.g. TTP and complement- mediated haemolytic
uraemic syndrome (HUS)).
Treatment
Treatment aims to be supportive and should be discussed with a
haematologist.

--- Page 305 ---

284
284 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Coagulation tests
Standard laboratory coagulation tests typically look at isolated areas of the
clotting cascade and can be related to intrinsic and extrinsic pathways in the
classical coagulation model. In the bleeding coagulopathic patient, pH, tem-
perature and ionised Ca2+ can also be measured for correction.
• PT: the time in s for clot to form, following addition of thromboplastin
and Ca2+ to citrated plasma. Detects deficiencies or inhibitors of factors
II, V, VII and X, and fibrinogen. Normal range: 11– 13.5s.
• INR: comparison of PT with laboratory reference sample to allow easy
standardisation. Detects deficiencies or inhibitors of factors II, V, VII and
X, and fibrinogen. Used for monitoring warfarin. Normal range: 0.8–1 .1.
• APTT: time for clot to form after an intrinsic factor activator (i.e. kaolin)
and Ca2+ added to citrated plasma. Detects deficiencies or inhibitors of
factors XII, XI, X, IX, VIII, V and II, and fibrinogen. Normal range: 25–3 5s.
• Fibrinogen: usually calculated from a coagulation assay, e.g. Clauss assay
(thrombin added to dilute plasma until clot forms). Normal range: 2–4 g/L .
POCT provides rapid and accurate information typically in theatre or the
ICU, allowing targeted, rather than empirical, treatment. There are three
main types of point- of- care coagulation testing:
• Coagulation time analysers, e.g. PT/ APTT/ ACT
• Viscoelastic clot strength analysers, e.g. TeG® and ROTeM®
• Platelet function analysers.
Coagulation time analysers
• PT and APTT can be measured by a small portable analyser. A drop of
whole blood is added to a cuvette. This can be useful for monitoring
warfarin status or heparin therapy.
• ACT is used in patients treated with high concentrations of UFH. A
drop of whole blood is added to a cuvette and the sample activated
using kaolin or celite. Often used in CPB surgery. Normal range: 70–
120s. For CPB, the target ACT is usually in the range of 400s.
Viscoelastic tests: thromboelastography/
thromboelastometry
Two analysers TeG® and ROTeM® are available and measure the
strength and elastic properties of clotting whole blood. TeG® uses
thromboelastography, while ROTeM® uses rotational thromboelastometry.
These viscoelastic tests give functional information on the time taken for
clot formation to begin, the speed and strength of clot formation and clot
lysis. Unfortunately, the standard tests are unable to test platelet function.
The potent platelet activation by thrombin overwhelms the effects of the
weaker platelet activators (ADP and arachidonic acid) on which antiplatelet
medications work. Newer Platelet Mapping Assays can be used with some
viscoelastic tests to allow assessment of antiplatelet drugs.
Techniques to assess the viscoelastic properties of clotting can involve
a rotating cup into which a wire is inserted, a spinning wire in a cup and,
more recently, subjecting the blood to vibration whereby the vertical move-
ment of the blood meniscus is measured under LeD illumination. A number
of different reagents are used in both techniques, but no matter the tech-
nique, the same trace is produced which facilitates targeted correction of
coagulopathy (Fig. 11.3). The nomenclature and normal values differ be-
tween the two techniques (Table 11.8).

--- Page 306 ---

COAGULATION TeSTS 285
Fig. 11.3 Typical trace for both TeG® and ROTeM®.
TEG®
TeG® uses kaolin as the reagent and tests the intrinsic pathway.
• Rapid TeG® (rTeG®) takes just 15min, compared with over 30min
for a standard trace, and uses kaolin and tissue factor to activate the
extrinsic pathway, which speeds up the test. In this test, the R-v alue is
replaced by the TeG- ACT value which is measured in s, rather than in
minutes. The remainder of the TeG parameters do not differ from the
standard test.
• Functional fibrinogen includes tissue factor and a platelet inhibitor
(abciximab) which removes the platelet contribution to clot strength, so
that the fibrinogen component can be seen independently.
• Platelet Mapping is a new addition to the TeG® repertoire and is
explained below.
ROTEM®
ROTeM® has a number of different tests:
• INTeM uses phospholipid and ellagic acid to test the intrinsic pathway
and is similar to APTT.
• eXTeM also uses tissue factor to test the extrinsic pathway and is
similar to PT.
• FIBTeM uses a platelet inhibitor (cytochalasin D) to inhibit the platelet
contribution and isolate the fibrinogen contribution to clot strength.
• HePTeM is essentially the same as INTeM, but with the addition of
heparinase which eliminates heparin from the sample, uncovering any
other underlying coagulopathy.
• APTeM uses aprotinin to rule out excessive fibrinolysis which could be
an indication for tranexamic acid.
• eCATeM is prolonged in patients on direct thrombin inhibitors. Using
ecarin, a prothrombin activator, it is similar to the ecarin clotting
time test.

### Table
|  |  |
| --- | --- |
|  |  |

--- Page 307 ---

286
286 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Table 11.8 Normal values for TeG® and the ROTeM®
TEG® ROTEM®
Clotting time (time to R* 4– 8min CT:
2mm amplitude) INTeM** 137– 246s
eXTeM** 42– 74s
Clot kinetics (2– 20mm K* 1– 4min CFT:
amplitude) INTeM** 40– 100s
eXTeM** 46– 148s
Clot strength (α angle) α* 47– 74° INTeM** 71– 82°
eXTeM** 63– 81°
Maximum strength MA* 55– 73mm MCF:
INTeM** 52– 72mm
eXTeM** 49– 71mm
Clot lysis CL30, CL60 LI30, ML
* Kaolin activated.
** Citrated.
CFT, clot formation time; CL30, clot lysis at 30min; CL60, clot lysis at 60min; CT, clotting time;
K, kinetics; LI30, lysis index at 30min; MA, maximum amplitude; MCF, maximum clot firmness;
ML, maximum lysis; R, reaction time.
Interpretation
Interpretation of a ROTeM® or TeG® is similar to learning how to interpret
an eCG. A stepwise approach is used initially and later pattern recognition
(Fig. 11.4).
Prolongation of clotting time/c lot formation time or reaction/ kinetics times
Has the patient had heparin? A HePTeM assay will be able to rule this out.
If heparin has been given and reversal is required, consider protamine. If no
heparin, the results are due to clotting deficiencies, so consider FFP.
Reduced maximum amplitude or maximum clot firmness
Perform a FIBTeM or a functional fibrinogen test. Is maximum amplitude
or maximum clot firmness reduced using these tests? If so, the result is
due to fibrinogen deficiency, so consider using cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen
concentrate. If not, the result is due to platelet deficiency, so correct with
platelet transfusion.
Increased CL30/ CL60 or LI30/ LI60
There is excessive fibrinolysis, so consider an antifibrinolytic. An APTeM
test will inhibit fibrinolysis, bringing LI30 and LI60 back to normal limits,
confirming the result.

--- Page 308 ---

COAGULATION TeSTS 287
Normal R; K; MA; Angel: normal
Anticoagulants/haemophilia
Factor deficiency
R; K: prolonged;
MA; Angle: decreased
Platelet blockers
Thrombocytopenia/thrombocytopathy
R; normal; K: prolonged;
MA: decreased
Fibrinolysis (UK, SK or t-PA)
Presence of t-PA
R; normal;
MA: continuous decrease
LY30 > 7.5%; WBCLI30 < 97.5%;
LY60 > 15.0% WBCLI60 < 85%
Hypercoagulation
R; K: decreased;
MA; Angle: increased
D.I.C
Stage 1
Hypercoagulable state with
secondary fibrinolysis
Stage 2
Hypercoagulable state
Fig. 11.4 Characteristic TeG® traces.
Platelet function analysers
Both quantitative and qualitative defects in platelet function can lead to
major bleeding after surgery or trauma. This may be genetic, due to a dis-
ease process, consumptive or as a result of an antiplatelet agent. There
are now many point-o f- care platelet analysers available. They have specific
activators to detect COX inhibitors (e.g. aspirin), P2y antagonists (e.g.
12
clopidogrel) and glycoprotein IIb/I IIa antagonists (e.g. abciximab).
• Similar to viscoelastic tests for coagulation, a graph is produced and
typically, inhibition of platelet function is reported as a percentage (e.g.
platelet function is 90% inhibited by clopidogrel in this sample).
• Analysers include PFA- 100®, Plateletworks®, TeG Platelet Mapping®,
VerifyNow®, Multiplate® and ROTeM PM®. With the exception of PFA-
100® which is only for aspirin, all these analysers measure all three types
of antiplatelet agents.

--- Page 309 ---

288
288 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Hypercoagulability syndromes
Polycythaemia
A pattern of RBC changes that usually results in Hb >17.5g/ dL in ♂ and
>15.5g/ dL in ♀. This is accompanied by a corresponding increase in the red
cell count to 6.0 and 5.5 × 1012/ L and an Hct of 55% and 47%, respectively.
Causes
• 1°: polycythaemia vera (PV)
• 2°: due to compensatory erythropoietin (ePO) increase (high altitude,
cardiorespiratory diseases— especially cyanotic, heavy smoking,
methaemoglobinaemia) or inappropriate ePO increase (renal diseases:
hydronephrosis, cysts, carcinoma; massive uterine fibromyomata;
hepatocellular carcinoma; cerebellar haemangioblastoma)
• Relative: stress or spurious polycythaemia. Dehydration or vomiting
• Plasma loss: burns, enteropathy.
Polycythaemia vera
Presenting features include headaches, dyspnoea, chest pain, vertigo, prur-
itus, epigastric pain, hypertension, gout and thrombotic episodes (particu-
larly retinal).
• Splenomegaly is typical.
• Thrombocythaemia occurs in 50% of cases.
• Differential diagnosis is with other causes of polycythaemia. These can
be excluded by history, examination and blood tests, including bone
marrow aspiration, ABGs and ePO levels.
• Genetic testing can reveal the JAK2 mutation in 90– 95% of patients with
PV, and in 50% of patients with myelofibrosis.
• Therapy is aimed at maintaining a normal blood count by venesection
and myelosuppression with drugs.
• Thrombosis is a potential cause of death, and 10% of cases develop
myelofibrosis and rarely acute leukaemia.
Essential thrombocythaemia
Megakaryocyte proliferation and overproduction of platelets are the dom-
inant features, with a sustained platelet count >450 × 109/ L.
• Closely related to PV, with recurrent haemorrhage and thrombosis as
the principal clinical features.
• Abnormal large platelets or megakaryocyte fragments may be seen on a
blood film.
• Differential diagnosis is from other causes of a raised platelet count,
e.g. haemorrhage, chronic infection, malignancy, PV, myelosclerosis and
chronic granulocytic leukaemia.
• Platelet function tests are consistently abnormal.
• Hydroxycarbamide is the mainstay of therapy, but some treatments are
more toxic.

--- Page 310 ---

HyPeRCOAGULABILITy SyNDROMeS 289
Antiphospholipid syndrome
This is a rare, but increasingly recognised syndrome resulting in arterial or
venous thrombosis or recurrent miscarriage, with a positive laboratory test
for antiphospholipid antibody and/o r lupus anticoagulant. It may present
with another autoimmune disease such as SLe (2°) or as a 1° disease. The
main feature of the disease is thrombosis, with a spectrum from subacute
migraine and visual disturbances to accelerated cardiac failure and major
CVe. Arterial thrombosis helps distinguish this from other hypercoagulable
states. Paradoxically, the LA leads to a prolongation of coagulation tests,
such as the APTT, but detailed testing is needed before the diagnosis can
be confirmed. Patients may present for surgery because of complications
(miscarriage, thrombosis) or for incidental procedures. Initially, patients are
started on aspirin, but after a confirmed episode of thrombosis, they usually
remain on lifelong warfarin. High risk of thrombosis in these patients means
that if warfarin needs to be stopped for surgery, IV heparin should be com-
menced both pre- and postoperatively.
Anaesthesia and surgery in the hypercoagulable patient
There are no published guidelines, but it seems prudent that elective pa-
tients who are polycythaemic should be venesected to a normal blood
count to decrease the risk of perioperative thrombosis.
• Antithrombotic stockings and intermittent compression devices should
be used with SC heparin.
• Haematological advice may be required.

--- Page 311 ---

290
290 CHAPTeR 11 Haematology
Further reading
McIlmoyle K, Tran H (2018). Perioperative management of oral anticoagulation. BJA Educ, 18,
259– 64.
Keeling D, Tait RC, Watson H; British Committee of Standards for Haematology (2016). Peri-
operative management of anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy. Br J Haematol, 175, 602– 13.
Klein AA, Arnold P, Bingham RM, et al. (2016). AAGBI guidelines: the use of blood components and
their alternatives 2016. Anaesthesia, 71, 829– 42.
Dimitrova G, Tulman DB, Bergese SD (2012). Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy in
patients with drug- eluting stents. HSR Proc Intensive Care Cardiovasc Anesth, 4, 153– 67.
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (2005). Blood transfusion and the anaes-
thetist: blood component therapy. M https:// www.e- safe- anaesthesia.org/ sessions/ 02_ 05/ pdf/
bloodtransfusion06.pdf
References
1 Davis BA, Allard S, Qureshi A, et al. (2017). Guidelines on red cell transfusion in sickle cell dis-
ease. Part I: principles and laboratory aspects. Br J Haematol, 176, 179– 91.
2 Foedinger A, Luger TJ (2016). Glucose- 6- phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Anästh
Intensivmed, 57, S115– 38.
3 Stravitz RT, Lisman T, Luketic VA, et al. (2012). Minimal effects of acute liver injury/a cute liver
failure on hemostasis as assessed by thromboelastography. J Hepatol, 56, 129– 36.
4 Scully M, Hunt BJ, Benjamin S, et al. (2012). Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and other thrombotic microangiopathies. Br J Haematol,
158, 323– 35.
5 Hicks T, Stewart F, eisinga A (2016). NOACs versus warfarin for stroke prevention in patients
with AF: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Open Heart, 3, e279.
6 Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA, et al. (2012). Perioperative management of
antithrombotic therapy. Chest, 141, e326S– 50S.
7 Kearon C, Akl eA, Ornelas J, et al. (2016). Antithrombotic therapy for VTe disease. Chest, 149,
315– 52.
8 Hornor MA, Duane TM, ehlers AP, et al. (2018). American College of Surgeons’ Guidelines for
the perioperative management of antithrombotic medication. J Am Coll Surg, 227, 521– 36.
9 Koster A, Faraoni D, Levy JH (2018). Argatroban and bivalirudin for perioperative anticoagulation
in cardiac surgery. Anesthesiology, 128, 390– 400.
10 Oprea AD, Popescu WM (2013). Perioperative management of antiplatelet therapy. Br J Anaesth,
111, 3– 17.
11 Wijns W, Kolh P, Danchin N, et al. (2010). Guidelines on myocardial revascularization: The Task
Force on Myocardial Revascularization of the european Society of Cardiology (eSC) and the
european Association for CardioThoracic Surgery (eACTS). Eur Heart J, 31, 2501– 55.
12 Kristensen SD, Knuuti J, Saraste A, et al. (2014). 2014 eSC/ eSA Guidelines on non-c ardiac sur-
gery: cardiovascular assessment and management. Eur Heart J, 35, 2383– 431.
13 Roberts I, Shakur H, Coats T, et al. (2013). The CRASH- 2 trial: a randomised controlled trial and
economic evaluation of the effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events and
transfusion requirement in bleeding trauma patients. Health Technol Assess, 17, 1– 79.
14 The CRASH-3 Trial Collaborators (2019). effects of tranexamic acid on death, disability, vascular
occlusive events and other morbidities in patients with acute traumatic brain injury (CRASH- 3):
a randomised, placebo- controlled trial. Lancet, 394, 1713.
15 Fergusson DA, Hebert P, Mazer D, et al. (2008). A comparison of aprotinin and lysine analogues
in high- risk cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med, 358, 2319– 31.
16 Henry D, Carless P, Fergusson D, Laupacis A (2009). The safety of aprotinin and lysine-d erived
antifibrinolytic drugs in cardiac surgery: a meta-a nalysis. CMAJ, 180, 183– 93.