# Chapter 12: Neurological and muscular disorders

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 312-347*

---

## 頁面 312

Chapter 12 291

Neurological and muscular

disorders

Adam Young, Selin Kabadayi, and Sarah Marsh

Parkinson’s disease 292

Cerebrovascular events 296

Epilepsy 300

Anaesthesia in spinal cord lesions 303

Neuromuscular disorders 309

Motor neurone disease 310

Multiple sclerosis 311

Guillain– Barré syndrome 312

Myasthenia gravis 314

Muscular dystrophies 317

Rare conditions 322

Drug considerations in neurological disorders 324

## 頁面 313

292

292 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Parkinson’s disease

General considerations

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a multisystem neurological disorder character-

ised by a triad of muscle rigidity, bradykinesia and a resting tremor. Loss of

dopaminergic neurones in the substantia nigra of the basal ganglia results in

a dopamine deficiency and excessive thalamic inhibition. this leads to the

classical symptoms seen. the disease affects over 100 000 people in the

UK, with a prevalence of 71% in those aged over 65, and is associated with

an i risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality. the disease is incurable

and progress cannot be slowed; treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms

with either medication or surgical intervention such as insertion of a deep

brain stimulator.

Drug therapies

• the goal of drug therapy is to increase the amount of dopamine readily

available within the CNS (table 12.1) and to reduce cholinergic activity. this

can be achieved either by administering a dopamine agonist or by inhibiting

the enzymatic breakdown of dopamine in the CNS by monoamine oxidase

B (MAO-B ) or catechol-O -m ethyltransferase (COMt).

• Drug therapy is, however, limited by severe side effects (nausea and

confusion), especially in the elderly. Up to 20% of patients will remain

unresponsive to drug therapy.

• Dopamine is administered as a prodrug (such as levodopa) to allow it to

cross the blood– brain barrier, and must be administered with a DOPA

decarboxylase inhibitor (such as carbidopa) to prevent peripheral

metabolism.

• Anticholinergic drugs are used when symptoms are mild and tremor

predominates, and can be useful in drug- induced parkinsonism.

Table 12.1 Drug therapies in Parkinson’s disease

Class of drug Examples Notes

Dopamine precursors Levodopa– Short half- life necessitates frequent

in combination with carbidopa administration

DOPA decarboxylase Levodopa–

inhibitor benserazide

Dopamine agonists Pramipexole Adjunctive therapy; also used

(enteral) Ropinirole if levodopa therapies cause

Bromocriptine intolerable side effects

Dopamine agonists Rotigotine transdermal patch

(parenteral) Apomorphine SC infusion; highly emetogenic

MAO- B inhibitors Selegiline Avoid pethidine and selective

Rasagiline serotonin reuptake inhibitor/ tCA–

risk of serotonin syndrome

COMt inhibitors Entacapone Caution with drugs metabolised by

tolcapone COMt (adrenaline, noradrenaline)

Anticholinergics Procyclidine Limited efficacy; side effects

Benztropine (confusion, urinary retention)

limit use

## 頁面 314

PARKiNSON’S DiSEASE 293

Preoperative assessment

Patients with PD have i perioperative morbidity and mortality, as well as

an i length of stay.

in addition, the complexity of the timing and administration of drug ther-

apies necessitates a multidisciplinary approach during the perioperative

period, including from a PD specialist.

important points:

• A history of dysphagia or excessive salivation (sialorrhoea) is suggestive

of upper airway dysfunction and indicates an i risk of failing to protect

the airway during the perioperative period. this may manifest as

aspiration, laryngospasm or postoperative pulmonary complications

such as infection.

• Respiratory function may be further impaired by rigidity and

bradykinesia, as well as sputum retention.

• Cardiovascular instability can result from arrhythmias or orthostatic

hypotension 2° to the disease itself or as a side effect of medications.

• the management of medication administration must be clear and

appropriate preparations made to be able to source and administer the

drug; where enteral medications cannot be given, substitutive parenteral

therapy must be instigated (see % p. 292).

• the patient should be warned that, even with extensive planning,

perioperative management of their parkinsonism may not be optimal

and distressing symptoms may recur. Delirium is also common, with

reported rates as high as 60%.

Drugs to avoid

• Several drugs commonly used in the perioperative period are

contraindicated in PD as they can significantly worsen symptoms or

cause harmful interactions.

• Antiemetics (prochlorperazine, droperidol, metoclopramide) antagonise

dopamine and exacerbate symptoms.

• Pethidine interacts with selegiline which can lead to serotonin syndrome

(see % p. 332).

• Synthetic opioids cause presynaptic inhibition of dopamine and cause

dose- related muscle rigidity.

• Clonidine can cause profound hypotension by enhancing the relative

hypovolaemia.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Medications for PD should continue uninterrupted until the start of

anaesthesia. Distressing symptoms may develop as little as 3h after a

missed dose and acute withdrawal of drugs may precipitate symptoms

resembling neuroleptic malignant syndrome.

• Consider antisialagogue premedication in the presence of significant

sialorrhoea such as glycopyrronium (200– 400 micrograms iM).

• Patients with PD have a high incidence of dysphagia, gastroparesis and

gastro- oesophageal reflux. Consideration therefore should be given to

securing the airway with RSi and intubation.

• Fixed flexion deformity of the neck can occur.

## 頁面 315

294

294 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

• Regional anaesthesia has advantages for those with a difficult airway or

significant respiratory or cardiovascular complications. it also allows a

rapid return to oral intake. however, muscle rigidity and tremor can

interfere with positioning, surgery and monitoring and the sympathetic

blockade can exacerbate autonomic dysfunction.

• hypotension is common and can be difficult to treat.

• Domperidone, which does not cross the blood–b rain barrier, may be

used safely.

• if dysphagia will prevent administration of oral analgesia, an NGt may

be required.

• Muscle rigidity may result in the patient being unable to operate patient-

controlled analgesia.

• For prolonged procedures, administration of dopaminergic medications

through an NGt may be necessary.

Postoperative care

• H the 1° consideration is restoration of dopaminergic therapy

to prevent an exacerbation of symptoms or an acute withdrawal

syndrome.

Withdrawal syndromes in Parkinson’s disease

Parkinsonism– hyperpyrexia syndrome

this follows an abrupt withdrawal of levodopa and resembles neuroleptic

malignant syndrome with rigidity, pyrexia, autonomic instability and im-

paired mental status. it is treated by reinstigating dopaminergic agents and

has a high mortality if untreated.

Dopamine agonist withdrawal syndrome

this condition manifests with neuropsychiatric symptoms, including de-

pression, fatigue, irritability, diaphoresis and orthostatic hypotension.

• Patients with advanced disease should be considered for admission to

critical care due to the high risk of potential complications.

• if prolonged Gi dysfunction is anticipated postoperatively (such as

following emergency laparotomy), parenteral antiparkinson therapy

must be instigated. this can be commenced relatively easily with the use

of rotigotine patches or apomorphine infusions (more difficult to dose,

however, and highly emetogenic).

Dosing of rotigotine

• take advice from a specialist in the management of PD for conversion

of enteral medications to transdermal rotigotine.

• in an emergency, or if specialist help is unavailable, dose equivalence

calculators are available online at

M http:// www.parkinsonscalculator.com

## 頁面 316

PARKiNSON’S DiSEASE 295

Special considerations

• implantation of deep brain stimulators is increasingly being performed

in patients with advanced disease. Should the patient then require

further unrelated surgery, standard precautions for implantable devices

should be used such as using bipolar diathermy. the device should be

turned off prior to anaesthesia and checked postoperatively.

• Postoperative delirium is common in patients with PD and may

be delayed. A thorough assessment should be made for potential

triggers such as hypoxia or urinary retention. Non- pharmacological

management, such as orientation measures, are preferable to

pharmacological treatment. however, if required, low doses of

benzodiazepines or quetiapine can be given. Dopamine antagonists such

as haloperidol must be avoided.

Further reading

Roberts DP, Lewis SJG (2018). Considerations for general anaesthesia in Parkinson’s disease. J Clin

Neurosci, 48, 34– 41.

Chambers DJ, Sebastian J, Ahearn DJ (2017). Parkinson’s disease. BJA Educ, 17, 145– 9.

## 頁面 317

296

296 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Cerebrovascular events

CVEs are a leading cause of death and disability worldwide. in the UK, 1.2

million people have a history of CVE. Around 85% of CVEs are ischaemic in

nature, and 15% are haemorrhagic. the resulting clinical outcome can range

from no deficit, a relatively mild focal neurological deficit to profound dis-

ability. Given the ongoing improvement in outcomes following CVEs, these

patients are increasingly likely to present for surgery and, as such, require

careful perioperative management.

H the most important risk factor for a perioperative CVE is a

previous CVE.

General considerations

Outcome following a perioperative CVE is poor and optimal 2° prevention

measures are extremely important to maximise recovery. Perioperative

hypotension can, for example, precipitate a watershed infarct at a vulner-

able boundary between vascular territories.

When to operate following a CVE

• the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events is markedly i following

CVE. this risk decreases with time and plateaus after 9mo but remains

elevated compared to a patient who has never suffered a CVE.1

• if possible, delay surgery for 9mo after a CVE, unless the benefits of

earlier surgery outweigh the risks.

• tiAs require urgent investigation by a CVE physician and non-

emergency surgery should be delayed until this is completed.

• Emergency surgery should not be delayed; surgery within 3d of a CVE

may have a better outcome than surgery at d3– 14 due to delayed

impairment of cerebral autoregulation.2

Preoperative assessment

• Common associations with CVEs are older age, frailty, hypertension,

diabetes, respiratory disease, and cardiac disease.

• Medication and lifestyle changes should all be encouraged, including:

cessation of smoking, anticoagulation for valvular heart disease and

AF, lipid- lowering medications, glycaemic control and healthy diet to

normal BMi.

• For the symptomatic patient with known carotid artery stenosis of

>60%, discussion with a vascular surgeon regarding consideration for

endarterectomy may be appropriate.

• Physical disability may mean that impaired cardiorespiratory reserve is

not immediately obvious.

• Neurological examination is necessary prior to anaesthesia so that any

new perioperative neurological deficit can be identified early.

• ischaemic CVEs are associated with AF. An ECG is required to

determine the underlying cardiac rhythm. Rate control may be required.

• Assess for bulbar involvement. tracheal intubation may be needed and

the risk of postoperative pulmonary complications is raised.

• if patients are taking oral anticoagulation, iNR, eGFR or CC will be

needed to inform preoperative cessation of these drugs.

• Post- CVE epilepsy occurs in 710% of patients. Antiepileptic drugs should

be continued in the perioperative period.

## 頁面 318

CEREBROVASCULAR EVENtS 297

Antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy

• Aspirin and clopidogrel are the most commonly used antiplatelet

drugs for 2° prevention of CVEs.

• Anticoagulant drugs, such as warfarin, or direct oral anticoagulants,

such as apixaban, are used to reduce the risk of embolic CVEs, usually

in the setting of AF.

• Withdrawal of antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy is associated

with an i risk of perioperative CVE, thought to be due to rebound

hypercoagulability aggravating the prothrombotic state that exists

after surgery.3 the i risk of CVE must be balanced against the risks of

i surgical bleeding and the exclusion of central neuraxial techniques.

this decision may require specialist physician, anaesthetic and surgical

input and documented discussion with the patient.

• ideally, antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents should be continued in

procedures with a low risk of bleeding.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Antihypertensive medication should be continued in the perioperative

period, with the exception of ACE inhibitors and ARBs which should be

withheld for 24h before and after surgery. these medications may cause

profound, resistant hypotension, especially at induction.

• Contractures may make venous access and patient positioning

challenging.

• Suxamethonium can cause hyperkalaemia in hemiplegic patients; this has

been reported as early as 1w and as late as 6mo after CVE.

• haemodynamic instability may occur due to a relatively fixed vascular

system. invasive arterial monitoring and careful use of vasoactive agents

may be required.

• Anaesthetic technique does not appear to influence the risk of

perioperative CVE, except in lower limb arthroplasty where neuraxial

blockade may reduce the risk of death or further CVE.

• intraoperative hypotension should be avoided in patients at risk of

perioperative CVE. BP should be maintained at the patient’s baseline.

if a baseline BP is not available, the MAP should not be allowed to

decrease below 80mmhg.4

• hypotension and hypocapnia must be avoided to prevent the

watershed area around the infarcted cerebral tissue from also becoming

irreversibly damaged.

• Blood glucose should be maintained between 4 and 10mmol/L .

• Metoprolol should not be used to treat intraoperative hypertension—i t

is associated with an i risk of perioperative CVE. Other β- blockers

appear to be safe.

• New neurological signs postoperatively will require urgent imaging and

discussion with the CVE team.

## 頁面 319

298

298 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Mechanical thrombectomy

• Mechanical thrombectomy or clot retrieval is an intervention that can

remove an obstructing embolus from the affected vessel.

• A minimally invasive angiographic technique is used with a catheter

passed via the groin or wrist to the site of the embolus.

• if performed promptly, the neurological deficit can be minimised or

even reversed completely.

• the procedure can be carried out under GA or sedation. GA may be

preferred if there is bulbar involvement, agitation or a reduced level

of consciousness (e.g. basilar artery thrombus).

• Patient outcome correlates with BP management, not the anaesthetic

technique. hypotension is particularly poorly tolerated. Systolic

pressure should be maintained at 140– 180mmhg, with diastolic

pressure <105mmhg.5

Postoperative care

• Reinstate anticoagulants as soon as the surgical team allows.

• intraoperative BP targets should continue postoperatively.

• Consider critical care admission for comorbid patients or those with

bulbar involvement.

Haemorrhagic CVE

• this may be due to aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage,

spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage, rupture of an arteriovenous

malformation, haemorrhage into a tumour or cerebral amyloid

angiopathy.

• hypertension is the commonest risk factor for spontaneous

intracerebral haemorrhage.

• Other risk factors include DM, cigarette smoking and alcohol excess.

• Patients who survive the acute phase may be significantly impaired

with weakness, contractures and/o r cognitive deficits.

• BP following intracerebral haemorrhage should be maintained

<140mmhg systolic.6

• When bleeding has occurred due to an aneurysmal rupture, systolic

BP should be maintained between 110 and 160mmhg until the

aneurysm is secured.7

(See also % p. 576.)

## 頁面 320

CEREBROVASCULAR EVENtS 299

References

1 Jorgensen ME, torp- Pedersen C, Gislason Gh, et al. (2014). time elapsed after ischaemic CVE

and risk of adverse cardiovascular events and mortality following elective noncardiac surgery.

JAMA, 312, 269– 77.

2 Christiansen M, Andersson C, Gislason Gh, et al. (2017). Risks of cardiovascular adverse events

and death in patients with previous CVE undergoing emergency noncardiac, nonintracranial sur-

gery: the importance of operative timing. Anesthesiology, 127, 9– 19.

3 Mehdi Z, Birns J, Partridge J, et al. (2016). Perioperative management of patients with a history of

CVE or transient ischaemic attack undergoing elective non- cardiac surgery. Clin Med, 16, 535– 40.

4 Minhas JS, Rook W, Panerai RB, et al. (2020). Pathophysiological and clinical considerations in the

perioperative care of patients with a previous ischaemic CVE: a multidisciplinary narrative review.

Br J Anaesth, 124, 183– 96.

5 talke PO, Sharma D, heyer EJ, et al. (2014). Society for Neuroscience in Anesthesiology and

Critical Care Expert Consensus Statement: anesthetic management of endovascular treatment

for acute ischaemic CVE: endorsed by the Society of Neurointerventional Surgery and the

Neurocritical Care Society. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol, 26, 95– 108.

6 hemphill JC, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, et al. (2015). Guidelines for the management of spon-

taneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American

heart Association/ American CVE Association. Stroke, 46, 2032– 60.

7 Nathanson Mh, Andrzejowski J, Dinsmore J, et al. (2020). Guidelines for safe transfer of the

brain- injured patient: trauma and CVE, 2019: guidelines from the Association of Anaesthetists and

the Neuro Anaesthesia and Critical Care Society. Anaesthesia, 75, 234– 46.

## 頁面 321

300

300 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Epilepsy

Epilepsy is characterised by a predisposition of the brain to generate ab-

normal, synchonous, neuronal activity. the clinical manifestations vary

widely and can be focal or generalised, with consciousness maintained or

impaired. Epilepsy may be idiopathic or 2° to a structural, metabolic or trau-

matic cause. Antiepileptic drug therapy is used to reduce and/o r control

the rate of seizures. Surgery or implantation of neuromodulatory devices

(such as a vagus nerve stimulator) may be required in refractory cases.

General considerations

• it is vital that antiepileptic drug therapy is maintained throughout the

perioperative period, through either enteral or parenteral routes.

Preoperative assessment

• the nature, timing and frequency of seizures should be recorded, along

with a full drug history and timing of antiepileptic drug therapy. this

can help to determine strategies to minimise disruptions in treatment

regimes.

• Any associated medical conditions must also be assessed.

• if there is suboptimal control of seizures or in those where return to

therapy may be delayed after surgery, consult their specialist.

• Consider drug titres in patients as a baseline prior to major surgery or if

control is suboptimal.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Perioperatively antiepileptic drugs may need to be given, parenterally if

possible

• Specific drug considerations are considered in table 12.2.

• Check electrolyte and glucose levels as derangement reduces seizure

threshold, as does hypocapnia.

• iV induction can be performed with propofol or thiopental as both

have anticonvulsant properties at doses used for GA. Ketamine has

proconvulsant properties when used at low doses, but anticonvulsant

properties at GA doses.

• Regional anaesthesia may help to minimise disruption in antiepileptic

drug regimes and can also negate the possibility of missed seizure

activity occurring under GA. LAs can readily cross the blood–b rain

barrier and result in seizure activity if maximum doses are exceeded.

• Carefully assess any abnormal movements on induction or emergence

as misdiagnosing dystonic movements or shivering as epilepsy can have

profound implications for the patient (Box 12.1).

Box 12.1 Driving and epilepsy

A perioperative seizure in a patient holding a UK driver’s licence can result

in withdrawal of the licence for up to 1y. the impact of this on a patient’s

life cannot be overstated. Advice on fitness to drive is available from the

Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (M http:// www.gov.uk/ dvla).

## 頁面 322

EPiLEPSy 301

Table 12.2 Drugs with special considerations in epilepsy

Drug Notes

Pethidine and tramadol Both lower the seizure threshold and should

be avoided

Alfentanil Enhances EEG activity and prolongs seizures in

electroconvulsive therapy; avoid or use with

caution

Ketamine Proconvulsant at low doses, but anticonvulsant

at anaesthetic doses (>1mg/ kg iV)

Etomidate Avoid as associated with postoperative

seizures. Prolongs seizure duration in

electroconvulsive therapy

Metoclopramide, high incidence of dystonic reactions which

prochlorperazine, droperidol may lead to confusion with epileptic activity

Enflurane Associated with postoperative seizures (no

longer available in the UK)

Aminosteroid neuromuscular hepatic enzyme induction by antiepileptic

blockers (e.g. vecuronium, drugs may shorten duration of action

rocuronium)

What if oral or nasogastric therapy is not possible?

Phenytoin, sodium valproate and levetiracetam can be given iV at equiva-

lent doses to the oral formulation and carbamazepine can be given rectally.

hypoalbuminaemia, acid– base derangement and concomitant drug admin-

istration can markedly affect the antiepileptic drug levels. Advice from a

pharmacist and measurement of drug levels in the critically ill is very helpful.

Postoperative care

• Ensure antiepileptic therapy is reinstated as soon as possible.

• See table 12.3 for antiepileptic medication considerations.

• Abnormal movements in the postoperative period may not be due to

epilepsy. Look for other causes of seizure/ abnormal movement. the

consequences of a postoperative seizure for some patients will be

significant.

## 頁面 323

302

302 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Table 12.3 Antiepileptic medication considerations and interactions

Effect Consequence

Enzyme inducers (e.g. Reduce serum concentration of certain drugs,

carbamazepine, phenytoin, e.g. valproate, lamotrigine, steroids, oral

phenobarbital) contraceptives, amiodarone, digoxin, warfarin

Enzyme inhibitors (e.g. valproate increase serum concentration of certain

and stiripentol) drugs, e.g. lamotrigine, phenobarbital,

nimodipine, amitriptyline, warfarin

Metabolism inhibited by other Clarithromycin and erythromycin

drugs increase serum concentration of

carbamazepine

Amiodarone increases serum

concentration of phenytoin

May cause toxic levels of antiepileptic drugs

Metabolism induced by other Oral contraceptives markedly reduce serum

drugs lamotrigine concentrations, which may result

in subtherapeutic levels

Pharmacokinetic effects on Continuous NG feed impairs gastric

absorption, distribution or phenytoin absorption

excretion highly protein- bound drugs (valproate,

phenytoin) may displace other drugs

from protein- binding sites— rarely of

clinical importance

Effect on NMBAs Antiepileptic drugs may potentiate the

effect of non- depolarising neuromuscular

blockers when administered acutely, yet

cause resistance to their effects in chronic

use. Caused by a combination of effects such

as enzyme induction and upregulation of

acetylcholine receptors

impaired clearance of Renal/ hepatic failure, hypoalbuminaemia

antiepileptic drugs

Further reading

Carter EL, Adapa RM (2015). Adult epilepsy and anaesthesia. BJA Educ, 15, 111– 17.

Perks A, Cheema S, Mohanra JR (2012). Anaesthesia and epilepsy. Br J Anaesth, 108, 562– 71.

Johannessen Si, Johannessen Landmark C (2010). Antiepileptic drug interactions: principles and clin-

ical implications. Curr Neuropharmacol, 8, 254– 67.

## 頁面 324

ANAESthESiA iN SPiNAL CORD LESiONS 303

Anaesthesia in spinal cord lesions

in the UK, there are 750 000 patients currently living with chronic spinal

cord injuries. Around 1000 people sustain a new spinal cord injury in the

UK each year, with trauma being the commonest aetiology. Non-t raumatic

causes include infection, vascular disruption and degenerative disease. the

average age of patients suffering a spinal cord injury is increasing due to falls

from standing height in the expanding elderly population. Complex physio-

logical changes render anaesthetic management of these patients challen-

ging in both the acute and chronic phase.

Phases of acute spinal cord injury

injury to the spinal cord results in three physiologically distinct phases. (See

also % p. 1003.)

Hypertension

this starts almost immediately. there is massive catecholamine release

due to direct stimulation of the spinal cord, which causes hypertension and

tachycardia. this may result in myocardial ischaemia, cardiac failure and pul-

monary oedema.

Neurogenic shock

this stage follows rapidly and lasts for several weeks; most commonly seen

in lesions above t6. Disruption of autonomic pathways below the level of

injury results in hypotension (due to loss of sympathetic tone) and brady-

cardia (if the cardiac accelerator fibres at t1– t4 are affected). Unopposed

vagal tone may result in severe bradycardia or even asystole during pro-

cedures such as laryngoscopy and tracheal suctioning. the patient will be

hypotensive, but peripherally warm and vasodilated; excessive fluid admin-

istration can result in pulmonary oedema and early use of vasopressors

should be considered to maintain organ perfusion.

Spinal shock

this phase accompanies neurogenic shock and commences at the time

of injury. it initially consists of flaccid areflexia with loss of sensation and

motor paralysis. A four- phase course is described, with reflexes begin-

ning to return 1d after injury and achieving a hyperreflexive, spastic state

after 71y. Autonomic dysreflexia is a life-t hreatening manifestation of this

hyperreflexia (see below).

Primary and secondary injury

• 1° injury occurs at the time of the injury itself.

• 2° injury begins within minutes of the 1° injury and is due to spinal

cord oedema and ischaemia. the extent of 2° injury can be modified

by optimal management, e.g. stabilisation of affected vertebrae,

avoidance of hypotension.

• Spinal cord injury without radiographic abnormality (SCiWORA)

describes a neurological deficit without X-r ay or Ct evidence of

injury to the spinal column. MRi will usually identify the lesion.

Maintain a high index of suspicion if clinical features do not correlate

with initial imaging.

## 頁面 325

304

304 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Anaesthetic management of acute spinal cord injury

Whether the patient is in the ED or theatre, a high index of suspicion should

be maintained for coexisting life- threatening injuries, as these occur in ap-

proximately one- third of spinal cord injury patients. A patient who has suf-

fered major trauma and is unconscious should be assumed to have a spinal

cord injury until proven otherwise (see % Spinal trauma, pp. 1002–3.

Airway

Manual in-l ine stabilisation is mandatory during laryngoscopy to pre-

vent extension of the cervical spine from causing further damage.

Videolaryngoscopy may result in less movement of the cervical spine than

direct laryngoscopy. AFOi can also be considered. Coughing or gagging

must be avoided.

Breathing

Ventilatory support may be required in cervical and high thoracic lesions.

table 12.4 describes the ventilatory impact of cervical injury depending on

the level. in spinal cord injury where ventilation is dependent entirely on the

diaphragm, the patient should remain supine or slightly head down. this

increases VC as the abdominal contents push the diaphragm up into the

chest, allowing greater excursion during inspiration. For neuroprotective

reasons, normocapnia should be maintained and hypoxia avoided.

Circulation

in neurogenic shock, hypotension is due to sympathetic outflow disruption

and subsequent vasodilation. Avoid excessive fluid resuscitation as this may

precipitate pulmonary oedema; judicious use of vasopressors and vagolytic

agents is recommended. Assuming no major haemorrhage is present, a

neuroprotective MAP target of 85– 90mmhg may help to optimise spinal

cord perfusion and reduce 2° injury. Early urinary catheterisation is advised

to prevent vagal stimulation caused by bladder distension and to allow ac-

curate fluid balance calculations.

Disability

the extent of the spinal cord injury should be classified using the American

Spinal injury Association impairment Scale. Neurological deficit often does

not fit the patterns of spinal cord injury, as described in table 12.5, in the

acute setting. Note that spinal cord injury alone does not cause loss of con-

sciousness and so intracranial pathology should be excluded. Maintenance

of in- line immobilisation is mandatory until spinal cord injury can be ex-

cluded with clinical examination or radiological investigation.

Exposure

Ensure a full 2° survey is performed to identify any concurrent injuries. Be

aware that there is a risk of hypothermia due to peripheral vasodilation.

## 頁面 326

ANAESthESiA iN SPiNAL CORD LESiONS 305

Table 12.4 Respiratory effects by level of lesion

Above Loss of phrenic nerve innervation results in diaphragmatic paralysis and

C3 complete dependence on mechanical ventilation

C3– C5 Variable diaphragmatic function remains; mechanical ventilation may be

required, depending on extent of loss of function

C6– C8 Diaphragmatic function is intact and may be adequate to support

inspiratory effort in combination with accessory neck muscles.

intermittent non- invasive ventilatory support may be required. Cough

is markedly impaired, with consequent risk of sputum retention,

atelectasis and pneumonia

Below Minimal ventilatory compromise, but cough may be impaired with i risk

C8 of sputum retention and pneumonia

Table 12.5 Patterns of spinal cord injury

Type Injury pattern Consequences

Complete No intact neurones pass Complete absence of motor and

through the site of injury sensory function below the lesion

Incomplete

Anterior cord Usually due to disruption of Loss of motor function, pain

syndrome the anterior spinal artery and temperature sensation

below the lesion

Preservation of fine touch,

proprioception and vibration

Brown- Cord hemisection (e.g. ipsilateral loss of motor

Séquard trauma) function, fine touch,

syndrome proprioception and vibration

below the lesion

Contralateral loss of pain and

temperature

Central cord injury to central grey Greater motor impairment in

syndrome matter of the cord, most upper limbs, compared to lower

commonly in the cervical limbs

spine

Posterior cord Rare— can be due to Loss of vibration, fine touch and

syndrome infarction of posterior spinal proprioception below the lesion

arteries, trauma or disc

compression

Autonomic dysreflexia

Autonomic dysreflexia is a potentially life- threatening condition, charac-

terised by an inappropriate autonomic response to a stimulus below the

level of the spinal cord lesion. it is seen in up to 50– 70% of patients with

a spinal cord injury at or above t6. the incidence is greater with higher

lesions and complete cord injury. it may occur as early as 3w following

the initial injury.

Common precipitants include: pain, bladder distension, urinary tract in-

fections, catheter insertion and faecal impaction.

## 頁面 327

306

306 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Activation of the sympathetic chain causes intense vasoconstriction and

subsequent hypertension, compounded by loss of descending inhibitory

control due to cord injury. Features include hypertension, headache,

flushing, sweating and anxiety.

Life- threatening hypertension can cause cardiac emergencies, including

myocardial ischaemia, arrhythmias and pulmonary oedema. Neurological

complications are also possible, including seizures and intracranial

haemorrhage.

Management involves determining the cause of the autonomic dysreflexia

and managing the consequent hypertension:

• Exclude bladder distension and constipation, and search for trigger.

• Sublingual GtN or nifedipine 10mg, or slow iV hydralazine 20mg.

• if hypertension persists, iV GtN, phentolamine or magnesium may

be used.

Chronic spinal cord injuries and anaesthesia

Chronic spinal cord injuries result in marked alterations of physiology.

• Reduced blood volume and anaemia

• Postural hypotension due to pooling of blood in the lower limbs

resulting from lack of muscle pump and reduced sympathetic tone

• Spasticity and hyperreflexia causing contractures. Baclofen

(γ- aminobutyric acid agonist) is the commonest medication used to

treat contractures and can be administered intrathecally via an SC

pump. this must be taken into account when applying a diathermy pad

or performing neuraxial anaesthesia.

Suxamethonium

Following a spinal cord injury, upper motor neurone denervation results in

nicotinic acetylcholine receptors propagating beyond the motor endplate

of the neuromuscular junction. Suxamethonium administration can cause

an elevated release of K+ due to the i number of receptors being de-

polarised. Life- threatening hyperkalaemia can occur. Suxamethonium is

contraindicated from 72h to 6mo after injury.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Patients are likely to have undergone multiple previous anaesthesia;

review previous anaesthetic charts.

• if surgery is planned for an insensate region, autonomic dysreflexia may

still be precipitated, even if pain is not. it may be possible to undergo

the procedure without anaesthesia, but vigilance for the sequelae of

autonomic dysreflexia must be maintained.

• Autonomic dysreflexia and ihD are common. Consider invasive arterial

BP monitoring, especially if significant fluid shifts are anticipated.

• Laryngoscopy may be difficult if there has been cervical fixation.

• Spinals and epidurals are advantageous in reducing postoperative

ventilation and autonomic dysreflexia. Less cardiovascular instability

as sympathetic tone is already reduced. May be unreliable and can be

difficult to determine the level of block achieved in complete spinal cord

## 頁面 328

ANAESthESiA iN SPiNAL CORD LESiONS 307

lesions. A change in tone from spasticity to flaccid paralysis can indicate

an effective block. Scoliosis and previous surgery can make spinal and

epidural placement difficult.

• if upper limb surgery is being performed in a patient with impaired

respiratory function, consider carefully the risks of a brachial plexus

block. Phrenic nerve palsy may cause a dramatic deterioration in

respiratory function.

• Consider RSi as gastric emptying is delayed, particularly with higher

spinal cord injuries.

• Prolonged ventilation and a tracheostomy can result in respiratory

complications such as altered lung dynamics and tracheal stenosis—

ensure such issues are investigated prior to surgery.

• A proportion of patients with high cervical injuries require domiciliary

ventilation via an uncuffed tracheostomy tube. Consider replacing this

for a cuffed tube before ventilation.

• Any history of autonomic dysreflexia should be carefully explored.

• Reduced chest wall compliance due to intercostal muscle spasticity in

cervical lesions results in hypoventilation and an abnormal response to

hypercapnia. Sleep apnoea is more frequent.

• Anticholinergics may be required for any procedure that is likely to

stimulate the vagus nerve (e.g. laryngoscopy, laparoscopy) if cardiac

accelerator innervation is impaired (t1– 4).

• Accelerated atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is seen and may be

asymptomatic due to the inability to stress the CVS. have a high index

of suspicion for cardiovascular complications.

• impaired thermoregulation is common, therefore consider siting a

temperature probe.

• Osteoporosis is common; take great care when moving patients. Ensure

meticulous positioning; atrophic skin with poor cutaneous perfusion is

at high risk for developing pressure areas.

• Over 50% of patients have chronic neuropathic pain and may be on

long- term analgesics. A tailored perioperative analgesic regime is

required involving acute and chronic pain teams.

• high risk of VtE; consider the need for mechanical and/o r

pharmacological thromboprophylaxis.

Postoperative care

• Patients with injuries at the cervical level should be recovered in

a supine position to optimise respiratory function by maximising

diaphragmatic excursion.

• Autonomic dysreflexia may occur due to pain from the surgical site or

other common triggers.

• in cervical and upper thoracic lesions, respiratory function will be

suboptimal and the risk of postoperative pulmonary complications is

high. Consider elective postoperative respiratory support.

Obstetric anaesthesia

(See % pp. 838–9.)

• Obstetric patients with chronic spinal cord injury have an i risk of

preterm delivery, thromboembolism, sepsis and CS. Assessment in an

obstetric anaesthetic clinic is highly advisable, with a detailed plan made

for management in both elective and emergency situations.

## 頁面 329

308

308 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

• the effect of the gravid uterus on diaphragmatic excursion may greatly

affect respiratory function in patients with high thoracic/c ervical

injuries. An increase in respiratory support may be required and regular

measurement of VC should be performed.

• While a spinal can usually be sited, performing an epidural in an area of

spinal fusion frequently can result in failure, a dural tap or an inadequate

block. An alternative plan should be considered.

• Patients with a history of autonomic dysreflexia should be particularly

closely monitored.

• Anaemia of chronic spinal cord injury may be compounded by

pregnancy.

• Patients with lesions above t10 are unlikely to feel contractions. they

can, however, be a trigger for autonomic dysreflexia. Epidural analgesia

is the most effective way of preventing this and consideration should be

made to siting this prior to induction of labour, especially as it may be

challenging to insert and assess.

• Pre- eclampsia should always be considered as a differential diagnosis to

suspected autonomic dysreflexia in these patients.

• Patients have exaggerated postural hypotension and tolerate aortocaval

occlusion poorly. Great care must be taken with patient positioning.

• the contracted uterus may still act as a trigger for autonomic

dysreflexia. if an epidural is present, consider leaving it in situ for up to

48h in case this occurs.

• Postpartum autotransfusion of blood from the contracted uterus may

be sufficient to cause pulmonary oedema and respiratory failure in

patients with cervical lesions.

Further reading

Eldahan KC, Rabchevsky AG (2018). Autonomic dysreflexia after spinal cord injury: systemic patho-

physiology and methods of management. Auton Neurosci, 209, 59– 70.

Burke D, Fullen BM, Stokes D, et al. (2016). Neuropathic pain prevalence following spinal cord injury:

a systematic review and meta- analysis. Eur J Pain, 21, 29– 44.

Petsas A, Drake J (2015). Perioperative management for patients with a chronic spinal cord injury.

BJA Educ, 15, 123– 30.

## 頁面 330

NEUROMUSCULAR DiSORDERS 309

Neuromuscular disorders

Neuromuscular disorders can be categorised into acquired or hereditary

conditions, and the anatomical site affected (table 12.6). Common condi-

tions will be discussed in more detail.

Table 12.6 Categorisation of neuromuscular disorders

Acquired Prejunctional Motor neurone disease (amyotrophic lateral

sclerosis, spinal muscular atrophy, spinal bulbar

muscular atrophy), multiple sclerosis, Guillain–

Barré syndrome, peripheral neuropathies

Junctional Myasthenia gravis, Lambert– Eaton myasthenic

syndrome, congenital myasthenic syndrome

Post- junctional inflammatory myopathies and critical illness

polyneuropathy and myopathy

Hereditary Prejunctional Peripheral neuropathies, e.g. Charcot– Marie–

tooth, Friedreich’s ataxia

Post- junctional Muscular dystrophies, e.g. Duchenne,

Becker, limb- girdle, myotonic dystrophy,

fascioscapulohumeral, Emery– Dreifuss

Non- dystrophic myotonias: myotonia

congenita, periodic paralysis, central core

disease, myotonia fluctuans

Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders,

e.g. lactate dehydrogenase deficiency,

mitochondrial myopathy

Neuromuscular conditions are a concern for the anaesthetist as many

will have some of the features listed below:

• Respiratory: pharyngeal and respiratory muscle involvement results

in respiratory insufficiency, aspiration risk and OSA. Difficult airways

due to dysmorphic features that can be a feature of some diseases.

Restrictive pulmonary picture due to scoliosis

• Cardiovascular: autonomic dysfunction, cardiomyopathy and

conduction defects

• Metabolic: electrolye imbalance, rhabdomyolysis due to sustained

muscle contraction, Mh- like phenomena

• Pharmacological: sensitivity to muscle relaxants and life-t hreatening

sequelae of suxamethonium administration.

### 表格


| Table 12.6 Categorisation of neuromuscular disorders |
| --- |
| Acquired Prejunctional Motor neurone disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spinal muscular atrophy, spinal bulbar muscular atrophy), multiple sclerosis, Guillain– Barré syndrome, peripheral neuropathies Junctional Myasthenia gravis, Lambert– Eaton myasthenic syndrome, congenital myasthenic syndrome Post- junctional inflammatory myopathies and critical illness polyneuropathy and myopathy Hereditary Prejunctional Peripheral neuropathies, e.g. Charcot– Marie– tooth, Friedreich’s ataxia Post- junctional Muscular dystrophies, e.g. Duchenne, Becker, limb- girdle, myotonic dystrophy, fascioscapulohumeral, Emery– Dreifuss Non- dystrophic myotonias: myotonia congenita, periodic paralysis, central core disease, myotonia fluctuans Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders, e.g. lactate dehydrogenase deficiency, mitochondrial myopathy |



## 頁面 331

301

310 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Motor neurone disease

Motor neurone diseases are a group of neurodegenerative disorders in

which motor neurone degeneration leads to progressive muscle weakness.

Most commonly sporadic, but they can also be hereditary and infection-

related. the disease can affect purely lower motor neurones (progressive

muscular atrophy), upper motor neurones (1° lateral sclerosis), mixed

upper and lower neurones (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) or variants re-

stricted to upper/ lower limbs or the bulbar region.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is the commonest form of motor neurone

disease. it initially presents with weakness, atrophy and fasciculation of per-

ipheral muscles (usually those of the hands) and progresses to axial and

bulbar weakness, including dysarthria and dysphagia. there is no sensory

loss and cranial nerves are unaffected.

Death usually results from respiratory failure, with 50% of patients dying

within 20mo of diagnosis. Management is focused on symptom relief and

palliation, led by a multidisciplinary team. Complex end-o f- life discussions

are mandatory and interventions such as domiciliary non-i nvasive ventila-

tion should be considered in totality. Around 50% of patients with motor

neurone disease will experience changes in cognitive function, ranging from

mild impairment to severe dementia, so forward planning is essential.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Consider PFts prior to surgery.

• Autonomic dysfunction can lead to significant hypotension during

induction, positive pressure ventilation and postural changes.

• Denervation of muscle leads to atrophy and development of

extrajunctional acetylcholine receptors. Suxamethonium should

therefore be avoided as it may cause life- threatening hyperkalaemia.

• NMBAs should be used at d doses due to i sensitivity.

• Respiratory complications are common, including i risk of

postoperative ventilation, weaning difficulties, infection and atelectasis.

those with bulbar involvement are at particular risk and elective critical

care admission should be considered.

• Consider regional anaesthesia techniques where possible, but minimise

the dose of LA to prevent nerve toxicity.

• Baclofen is sometimes used for spasticity and should not be abruptly

withdrawn due to precipitation of Mh- like crisis.

Further reading

Feigin VL, Nichols E, Alam t, et al. (2019). Global, regional, and national burden of neurological dis-

orders, 1990–2 016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet,

18, 459– 80.

## 頁面 332

MULtiPLE SCLEROSiS 311

Multiple sclerosis

Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease of the CNS characterised

by the development of inflammatory plaques, demyelination and axonal

damage to the brain and spinal cord. Onset usually occurs in early adult-

hood; the disease may relapse and remit or follow a chronic progressive

course. treatment aims are to limit progression and manage symptoms.

General considerations

• Patients are frequently on multiple medications. immunosuppressants to

manage disease progression (e.g. steroids, interferon beta), analgesics

for neuropathic pain and antispasmodics. Perioperative management

and potential interactions must be considered.

• Symptoms range from isolated visual disturbances to severe weakness

and typically recur and relapse. Profound spasticity, respiratory failure

and bulbar palsy can occur in end- stage disease.

• Demyelinated axons are sensitive to heat; an increase in temperature

may cause a marked deterioration in symptoms.

Preoperative assessment and investigation

• A documented, detailed preoperative neurological examination is

essential, especially if a regional technique is planned.

• Assess the current state of the disease and consider delaying elective

surgery if the patient is actively relapsing.

• Review any change in respiratory function. Bulbar palsy causes an i risk

of aspiration and reduced airway reflexes in the postoperative period.

Critical care may be required.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• GA itself does not affect the course of multiple sclerosis.

• Demyelinated axons are more susceptible to LA toxicity. Use the lowest

possible dose of LA, in combination with adjuncts such as low-d ose

opioids.

• Peripartum use of spinal or epidural techniques does not appear to

affect the occurrence of a postpartum relapse. Prior full neurological

examination and discussion with the patient are required to prevent the

patient from incorrectly attributing a postpartum relapse to anaesthesia.

• Suxamethonium should be avoided when severe weakness and

spasticity are present as it may result in life- threatening hyperkalaemia.

• Response to non-d epolarising drugs is normal.

• Autonomic dysfunction can lead to haemodynamic instability.

• Pyrexia should be avoided, if possible, and treated aggressively with

cooling measures.

Further reading

Kopp SL, Jacob AK, hebl JR (2015). Regional anesthesia in patients with preexisting neurologic dis-

ease. Reg Anesth Pain Med, 40, 467– 78.

## 頁面 333

321

312 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Guillain– Barré syndrome

Guillain– Barré syndrome is a rare disease (1:100 000) forming part of a

group of neuropathic conditions characterised by progressive weakness

and absent reflexes. the most common presentation is an acute inflam-

matory demyelinating polyneuropathy presenting with progressive motor

weakness. Less common subtypes or variants are listed in table 12.7. the

anaesthetic implications related to NDMRs persist after recovery of symp-

toms and therefore they should be used with caution in patients with a

history of Guillain– Barré syndrome.

Guillain– Barré syndrome often occurs as an autoimmune response fol-

lowing a viral or bacterial illness within the preceding month. Weakness

is classically ascending and symmetrical, with associated areflexia. Sensory

and autonomic dysfunction can also occur. Severity can range from mild to

severe debilitation. Diagnosis is based on clinical features, CSF testing (high

protein, low WCC) and nerve conduction studies.

in patients with Guillain– Barré syndrome:

• 725% will require intubation and mechanical ventilation

• 710% will die from associated complications

• 710% will suffer long- term neurological complications and physical

dependence.

treatment is generally supportive, however, regardless of subtype. Specific

interventions such as immunoglobulins or plasmapheresis may be used

to reduce neural inflammation and expedite recovery. Steroids are not

indicated.

Table 12.7 Guillain– Barré syndrome variants

Miller– Fisher Rare. Ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, bulbar and facial weakness

syndrome and absent reflexes. Specific antibodies often identified.

Good prognosis

Acute motor Strongly associated with Campylobacter jejuni and sometimes

axonal neuropathy Haemophilus influenzae infections; more common in summer

(AMAN) and in younger patients. Acute motor weakness with sensory

preservation. Axonal degeneration with no demyelination.

Specific antibodies can be identified

Acute motor- Similar to AMAN, but patients present with rapid and

sensory axonal severe motor and sensory dysfunction with muscle wasting.

neuropathy Recovery probably poorer than with AMAN

(AMSAN)

General considerations

the main systemic effects of Guillain–B arré syndrome and the subsequent

anaesthetic implications are summarised in table 12.8.

## 頁面 334

GUiLLAiN–BARRé SyNDROME 313

Table 12.8 Systemic effects of Guillain– Barré syndrome and anaesthetic

implications

Cardiovascular

Autonomic Over- or underactivity of both sympathetic and

dysfunction parasympathetic nervous systems:

• tachyarrhythmias, AV block, prolonged Qt and

asystole

• haemodynamic instability during induction,

positive pressure ventilation or postural changes

• ileus, urinary retention and abnormal sweating

Consider invasive cardiovascular monitoring and large-

bore IV access

Respiratory

Weakness of PFTs preoperatively

respiratory muscles

Risk of aspiration—c onsider RSI

Difficulty clearing secretions: risk of pulmonary

infection

Difficulty weaning from ventilatory support:

postoperative ventilation ± tracheostomy

Neurological

Bulbar and facial i risk of aspiration and upper airway collapse

palsy

Neuropathic pain Difficult perioperative analgesic management—

multimodal approach recommended

Neurological deficits Document any pre- existing deficit if performing regional

anaesthesia

Specific anaesthetic considerations

the 1° goals of anaesthesia in patients with Guillain– Barré syndrome are to:

• Minimise aspiration risk

• Maximise respiratory function

• Maintain haemodynamic stability

• Avoid depolarising NMBAs; there is upregulation of acetylcholine

receptors at the neuromuscular junction, which can persist for a

prolonged period after recovery. Administration of suxamethonium

risks precipitating hyperkalaemia and subsequent life-t hreatening

arrhythmias. these patients also have i sensitivity to NDMRs.

Further reading

Willison hJ, Jacobs BC, van Doorn PA (2016). Guillain–B arré syndrome. Lancet, 388, 717– 27.

## 頁面 335

341

314 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Myasthenia gravis

Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune condition characterised by muscle

weakness and fatigability on repetitive exertion. it is caused by antibodies

acting at the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor on the postsynaptic mem-

brane of the neuromuscular junction. Fewer functioning receptors are then

available for acetylcholine to bind to, resulting in impaired generation of

action potentials and subsequent muscle weakness. Disease onset shows a

bimodal distribution, primarily in younger women and older men. thymus

hyperplasia may have a role.

Symptoms range from mild ptosis to life-t hreatening bulbar and respira-

tory insufficiency. Weakness illustrates fatigability. Ptosis is often the 1st sign.

Diagnosis is made with blood tests for a cetylcholine receptor antibodies,

edrophonium administration or the ice-p ack test. the mainstay of chronic

management is oral anticholinesterase medication. Some patients may

require immunosuppressant therapy with steroids, plasma exchange or iV

immunoglobulins. A myasthenic crisis is an exacerbation of the disease that

necessitates mechanical ventilation due to respiratory or bulbar impairment.

General considerations

• Optimal management of the disease in the perioperative period is

imperative. involvement of a neurologist may help symptom control and

to reduce the risk of a myasthenic crisis.

• Patients who have recently undergone plasmapheresis will

have depleted plasma-esterase levels, prolonging the effect of

suxamethonium, mivacurium, ester- linked LAs and remifentanil.

Preoperative assessment

• take a full drug history and determine the effect of a missed dose of

anticholinesterase (missing a dose may precipitate severe symptoms).

Plan how anticholinesterase therapy will be administered in the

perioperative period (table 12.9).

• Assess weakness and the duration and progression of symptoms.

isolated, long- standing ocular symptoms are less likely to progress.

• Assess bulbar and respiratory function. intubation and ventilatory

support may be required.

Table 12.9 Adult treatment for myasthenia gravis

Drug Dose Notes

Pyridostigmine 30– 120mg 4- to 6- Gradual onset and offset. Reduced

PO hourly. Max 450mg/ severity of side effects. No parenteral

24h preparation available

30mg of PO pyridostigmine = 1mg of

iV neostigmine

Neostigmine 1– 2.5mg 2- to 4- Anticholinergic agents required to avoid

SC/ iM hourly. Max 20mg/ marked bradycardia

24h

Neostigmine 15– 30mg 2- hourly. i Gi side effects and shorter duration of

PO Max tolerable dose action than pyridostigmine

180mg

## 頁面 336

MyASthENiA GRAViS 315

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Maintain anticholinesterase therapy up to the time of induction.

• Avoid premedication with agents that may worsen symptoms of

myasthenia or cause sedation.

• intubate if FVC <15mL/k g.

• Use short- acting anaesthetic agents to minimise respiratory depression

on emergence.

• LA or regional anaesthesia should be used where possible.

• Patients are resistant to suxamethonium. it can be used, but an i dose

is required (1.5–2 .0mg/ kg). Do not administer any other neuromuscular

blocker until no fade is present on quantitative nerve monitoring.

• Non-d epolarising drugs: doses of 10– 20% normal are often adequate.

Monitor response with a quantitative nerve stimulator.

• Use short- acting non- depolarising relaxants that are metabolised

spontaneously or reversed by sugammadex.

• Neostigmine use may trigger a cholinergic crisis, especially if the patient

is taking other anticholinergic medications.

• Avoid ester-l inked LAs, such as prilocaine, as anticholinesterase therapy

may interfere with metabolism.

• Aminoglycosides, macrolides and fluoroquinolones all have

neuromuscular- blocking activity.

• Magnesium reduces presynaptic acetylcholine release at the

neuromuscular junction.

• iV lidocaine infusions may cause weakness.

• Steroids may worsen weakness in high doses.

• Ca2+ channel and β-b lockers, gabapentinoids, phenothiazines and

phenytoin can all affect neuromuscular function and care should be taken.

• Use multimodal analgesia to minimise the use of opioids.

• Extubate only if neuromuscular function is adequate.

• Consider admission to critical care for ongoing respiratory support.

Postoperative care

• Reinstitution of drug therapy is vital. An NGt may be required if bulbar

symptoms prevent swallowing.

• in the event of Gi failure, instigate parenteral therapy and seek expert

opinion from a neurologist.

• Close monitoring of respiratory function is mandatory, ideally with

serial VC measurements.

• Blood gases and SpO may be normal up to the point of respiratory

2

failure.

Predictors for postoperative ventilation

• Preoperative bulbar • Preoperative VC <2.9L

symptoms • intraoperative blood loss >1000mL

• Previous myasthenic crisis • Major body cavity surgery

• Duration of disease >6y • Serum acetylcholine receptor

• Coexisting chronic antibody >100nmol/ L

respiratory disease • Pronounced decremental response

• Pyridostigmine dose on repetitive nerve stimulation

>750mg/ d

## 頁面 337

361

316 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Special considerations

Myasthenic crisis vs cholinergic crisis

• Myasthenic crisis occurs when a patient with myasthenia receives

insufficient medication and a cholinergic crisis occurs when the patient

receives too much anticholinesterase therapy. they have similar

presentations; both may cause paralysis, bronchospasm, respiratory

failure and diaphoresis.

• Can be distinguished with a small dose of edrophonium which improves

a myasthenic crisis, but this can precipitate respiratory failure in

cholinergic crises.

• in a cholinergic crisis (e.g. organophosphate poisoning), too much

acetylcholine at the nicotinic receptor produces flaccid paralysis

and parasympathetic effects from the muscarinic receptors such

as salivation, lacrimation, and Gi upset. treatment is iV atropine or

glycopyrronium bromide to counteract the muscarinic effects.

• Myasthenic crises can also be triggered by trauma, infection or

metabolic disturbances and can result in bulbar and respiratory muscle

weakness which improves with anticholinesterase treatment.

Thymectomy

• Current evidence favours thymectomy in myasthenic patients; clinical

outcome is improved with a reduction in myasthenic crises and the need

for immunosuppressive therapy.

• trans- sternal, transcervical or thoracoscopic approaches can be used.

• Anaesthetic management for thymectomy follows the general principles

outlined above.

Lambert– Eaton myasthenic syndrome

Lambert– Eaton myasthenic syndrome is a rare autoimmune disorder that

causes proximal muscle weakness. it is associated with malignancy, particu-

larly small cell lung cancer.

• Antibodies to voltage- gated Ca2+ channels impair acetylcholine release

from the presynaptic junction into the synaptic cleft.

• Unlike in myasthenia, muscle weakness is improved by exercise and

anticholinesterase medication is less effective.

• Amifampridine is a treatment that enhances acetylcholine release at the

neuromuscular junction.

• Autonomic dysfunction and bulbar involvement may occur in advanced

disease.

• Patients with Lambert– Eaton myasthenic syndrome are extremely

sensitive to both depolarising and non- depolarising NMBAs. these

should be used with caution and in reduced doses.

• Postoperative issues are similar to those in patients with myasthenia

gravis.

Further reading

Wolfe Gi, Kaminski hJ, Aban iB, et al. (2016). Randomized trial of thymectomy in myasthenia gravis.

N Engl J Med, 375, 511– 22.

## 頁面 338

MUSCULAR DyStROPhiES 317

Muscular dystrophies

Muscular dystrophies are a collective group of progressive muscle dis-

orders, most often caused by defective or absent glycoproteins in the

muscle membrane such as dystrophin. there are >30 forms of muscular

dystrophies. inheritance follows one of three patterns:

• X- linked recessive: Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker muscular

dystrophy, scapuloperoneal muscular dystrophy

• Autosomal recessive: most ‘limb girdle’ types, scapulohumeral

muscular dystrophy, congenital muscular dystrophy, childhood muscular

dystrophy

• Autosomal dominant: facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, some

oculopharyngeal/ ocular muscle dystrophies.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy and myotonic dystrophy are discussed

below. table 12.10 summarises features of some of the other muscular

dystrophies.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the most common muscular dystrophy

(incidence of 1:5000 ♂ newborns) and is rapidly progressive. it is caused

by an alteration in the gene for dystrophin, a cytoskeletal protein that con-

tributes to the strength, stability and functionality of myofibrils. this leads

to disruption of the integrity of the sarcolemma and, consequently, myo-

fibril atrophy, necrosis and fibrosis. Although primarily an X-l inked condi-

tion affecting ♂ , some ♀ carriers are symptomatic, exhibiting a milder

phenotype.

General considerations

• Muscle weakness typically manifests between the ages of 2 and 5.

• it is characterised by a waddling gait, asymmetrical lower limb strength,

delayed motor milestones, calf hypertrophy and falls.

• Proximal muscles are involved before distal, and lower limb extremities

are affected before upper limb.

• Affected ♂ are usually wheelchair- bound by the age of 12 and suffer

from concomitant scoliosis and contractures. Death occurs from cardiac

or respiratory failure typically in 20– 30s.

• Key aspects of management are physiotherapy and treatment with

glucocorticoids to slow progression of muscular weakness.

• MD patients may test positive for Mh, but this can be a false positive.

treat as Mh susceptible (see % pp. 1096–8).

Physiological considerations

• Cardiovascular: dilated cardiomyopathy (up to 50% of those aged 15 or

over will have dilated cardiomyopathy), myocardial degeneration, heart

failure and arrhythmias (AF/ atrial flutter, ventricular tachycardia (Vt) or

VF). Signs and symptoms of heart failure in non- ambulatory individuals

are often subtle.

• Respiratory: progressive respiratory muscle weakness, mucus plugging,

atelectasis, pneumonia and restrictive respiratory failure. Management

includes physiotherapy with assisted coughing, assisted ventilation,

subsequent daytime ventilation and tracheostomy.

• Musculoskeletal: severe kyphoscoliosis, muscular contractures and

osteoporosis (worsened by glucocorticoid use).

## 頁面 339

381

318 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

• Haematological: vascular smooth muscle and platelet dysfunction can

result in i blood loss.

• GI: oesophageal dysmotility, delayed gastric emptying causing reflux.

Preoperative assessment and investigations

• Multidisciplinary team involvement is paramount prior to any surgical

intervention.

• Specific perioperative management is based on the recommendations

of an international body of experts in the management of Duchenne

muscular dystrophy (for Further reading, see % p. 320).

• Respiratory: physician review, comprehensive spirometry, measurement

of O saturation and assessment of blood or end- tidal carbon dioxide

2

(EtCO) level if saturations are <95% on air are recommended

2

preoperatively. Preoperative training in the use of assisted cough

techniques (if baseline peak cough flow <270L/ min) and non-i nvasive

ventilation are advised (necessary if baseline FVC <30% predicted,

strongly recommended if FVC <50% predicted).

• Cardiovascular: ECG, echocardiography and cardiology review. Patients

may be on antiarrhythmic medications or have implanted cardiac

devices.

• CK is often elevated, but a baseline level is useful in case of

perioperative complications such as rhabdomyolysis.

Conduct of anaesthesia

• Volatile agents and suxamethonium use in Duchenne muscular

dystrophy have been implicated in ‘anaesthesia-r elated rhabdomyolysis’

(severe rhabdomyolysis with hyperkalaemic cardiac arrest). these drugs

should therefore be avoided. the condition produces signs similar to,

but distinct from, those of Mh.

• if volatile anaesthesia is used for induction, it should be discontinued as

soon as possible, with conversion to tiVA.

• Non- depolarising neuromuscular blockers are safe, although reduced

doses are required. Suxamethonium should be avoided.

• there is a risk of haemodynamic instability due to cardiac disease,

especially in major surgery. Consider invasive arterial monitoring.

• Regional analgesia can minimise opioid use and potential postoperative

respiratory complications.

• Patients on glucocorticoids may require perioperative stress dosing.

• Consider extubating patients directly onto non-i nvasive ventilation if

their FVC is <50% predicted (and especially if <30% predicted). ideally,

extubation should be delayed until the secretion load is minimal and O

2

saturations are at baseline on air.

• Assisted cough techniques should be used postoperatively in patients

with baseline peak cough flow <270L/ min to reduce the risk of retained

secretions and pneumonia.

## 頁面 340

MUSCULAR DyStROPhiES 319

Myotonic dystrophy

Myotonic dystrophy is an autosomal dominant disorder that usually pre-

sents in the 2nd or 3rd decade of life. it exhibits symptoms and signs of

both dystrophies and myotonias. Abnormal Na+ or chloride channels in the

musculature result in the discharge of repetitive action potentials, leading

to sustained muscle contraction in response to stimulation. the disease is

progressive and has multisystem effects. Life expectancy depends on the

subtype of disease and may be normal or reduced.

General considerations

Clinical features are highly variable but include:

• Degradation of cardiac conduction system leading to dysrhythmias and

AV block. Mitral valve prolapse and cardiomyopathy possible

• Respiratory insufficiency due to atrophy of respiratory muscles and

diaphragm, impaired cough, OSA and central respiratory depression

• Muscular atrophy, particularly facial and peripheral muscles

• Dysphagia, dysmotility, reduced gastric emptying and bulbar palsy—

i risk of aspiration

• Possible cognitive impairment after 2nd decade of life

• DM, hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency and gonadal atrophy

• Pregnancy may aggravate the disease, and an elective CS is often

required due to uterine muscle dysfunction.

Preoperative assessment

• Assess respiratory function with spirometry; consider CXR and arterial

blood gases if significant impairment suspected.

• ECG ± echocardiography to look for dysrhythmias and cardiac

dysfunction. An implantable pacemaker may be in situ.

• Serum thyroid function tests, glucose and cortisol measurements.

Conduct of anaesthesia

H It is vitally important to avoid factors that may precipitate sustained

muscular contraction.

these include: hypothermia, drugs, shivering, mechanical or electrical

muscle stimulation including diathermy and NMBA monitoring.

• Premedication with a prokinetic and/ or antacid is helpful as patients are

at risk of aspiration; RSi may be required.

• Patients are sensitive to sedatives, so use sparingly.

• Avoid suxamethonium as it may cause sustained muscle contractures,

rhabdomyolysis and hyperkalaemia. Rocuronium allows use of

sugammadex for reversal, allowing complete reversal of NMBA and

avoiding the risk of drug- induced muscle contraction. Atracurium can

also be used. Do not use nerve stimulator or anticholinesterase as these

may provoke muscle contraction.

• inhalational anaesthetic agents have been implicated in rhabdomyolysis

and Mh- like reactions. Consider tiVA. if using inhalational maintenance,

avoid high concentrations which may affect cardiac contractility and

conduction.

• induction agents cause profound CVS depression.

## 頁面 341

320

320 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

• Sustained muscular contraction may make intubation, ventilation and

subsequent surgery difficult, and are not classically responsive to NMB.

Quinine and phenytoin have been reported to attenuate problematic

sustained contractions, as well as direct infiltration of the muscle

with LA.

• invasive arterial monitoring should be considered in patients

with cardiovascular impairment. Facilities should be available for

transcutaneous pacing in case of significant bradyarrhythmia.

• Consider regional anaesthesia or analgesia to minimise the use

of sedatives and opioids. Note that this does not prevent muscle

contraction in the area of block, however.

• Opioids may cause sustained muscle contraction.

• Avoid hypothermia; warm theatre and fluids, and use forced air

warmers, even during short procedures.

Postoperative care

• Consider hDU/ iCU for anything other than minor surgery.

• Chest physiotherapy is vital.

• Prolonged postoperative ileus can occur.

Further reading

Birnkrant DJ, Bushby K, Bann CM, et al.; the DMD Care Considerations Working Group (2018).

Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, part 2: respiratory, cardiac, bone

health, and orthopaedic management. Lancet Neurol, 17, 347– 61.

Schieren M, Defosse J, Böhmer A, et al. (2017). Anaesthetic management of patients with myop-

athies. Eur J Anaesthesiol, 34, 641– 9.

Birnkrant DJ, Panitch hB, Benditt JO, et al. (2007). American College of Chest Physicians Consensus

Statement on the respiratory and related management of patients with Duchenne muscular dys-

trophy undergoing anaesthesia or sedation. Chest, 132, 1977– 86.

## 頁面 342

MUSCULAR DyStROPhiES 321

seihportsyd

ralucsum

emos

fo

serutaef

fo

yrammuS

01.21

elbaT

seton

citehtseanA

caidraC

yrotaripseR

noissergorP

selcsum

detceffa

tsoM

ta ega

lausU

sisongaid

cinotoym

rof

sA

noitcudnoC

dna

yrotaripseR

y03

–02

enips

dna sgel

,smrA

y5 –2

ralucsum

ennehcuD

ees(

yhportsyd

,seitilamronba

selcsum

laegnyral

)y01

yb tiag

fo ssol(

ylno

♂

yhportsyd

)913

.p

%

,saimhtyhrra

devlovni

oidrac

detalid

y06

–03

sivlep

dna sgel

,smrA

doohdlihc

etaL

ralucsum

rekceB

dna

yhtapoym

ylrae

ot

laitrap(

yhportsyd

era eruliaf

traeh

doohtluda

)ticfied

nihportsyd

lla htiw

elbissop

ortsyd

ralucsum

ahp

dna

yrotaripseR

erom

1

epyt

—wolS

ylralucitrap

,serutcartnoC

y04

–01

yhportsyd

cinotoyM

rof kooL

.seihp

ssenkaew

laegnyr

ereves

yrotaripser

dna

lanips

,latsid

MPP

cepxe

efil

,etaredoM

ssenkaew

elcsum

lamixorP

doohdlihc

etaL

ralucsum

eldrig

-bmiL

ot

decuder

ycnat

ylrae

ot

yhportsyd

ega

elddim

doohtluda

noitabutni

tlucffiiD

cepxe

efil

,etaredoM

,sellihcA(

serutcartnoc

tnioJ

doohdlihC

ssufierD

–yremE

inhcet

lanoiger

dna

ot

decuder

ycnat

)enips

,woble

yhportsyd

seuq

ega

elddim

gnul

evitcirtser

ereveS

elbairaV

ynotopyh

,ssenkaew

elcsuM

htriB

ralucsum

latinegnoC

esaesid

serutcartnoc

dna

seihportsyd

## 頁面 343

322

322 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

Rare conditions

there are many rare neurological conditions that require a considered

approach to anaesthesia. A brief discussion of several key conditions is

outlined below.

Creutzfeldt– Jakob disease

this is a neurodegenerative, prion-r elated disease that may be sporadic,

inherited or transmitted through contaminated surgical instruments, trans-

fused human tissue or dietary exposure to the bovine form of the disease.

there is a rapid cognitive and neurological decline over months, leading to

death. Anaesthetic considerations are based on the severity of neurological

impairment. While there are no particular isolation precautions required,

airway equipment must be single-u se only and surgical instruments should

be disposed of following the procedure, as autoclaving does not destroy

transmissible prions.

Charcot– Marie–T ooth

A condition characterised by chronic peripheral neuromuscular denerv-

ation. Most forms are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Muscle

atrophy results in spinal and limb deformities; restrictive lung disease, dif-

ficult airway management and postoperative respiratory failure may result.

Avoid suxamethonium due to the risk of severe hyperkalaemia. NDMRs

may have a prolonged action; consider using a reversible agent.

Critical illness polyneuromyopathy

Critical illness polyneuromyopathy describes an overlapping syndrome of

diffuse, symmetrical, flaccid muscle weakness that occurs in critically ill pa-

tients and can contribute to failure to wean from mechanical ventilation.

there is no specific treatment other than best supportive care, treating

the underlying condition and minimising risk factors during critical illness.

there are no specific concerns regarding the conduct of anaesthesia.

Suxamethonium should be avoided.

Familial periodic paralysis

Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis

An autosomal dominant condition in which episodes of flaccid paralysis are

triggered by hyperkalaemia and stress states such as cold and hunger. Loop

diuretics can be used for preoperative K+ reduction. Avoid medications

that increase serum K+ such as suxamethonium. Volatile agents are safe to

use. Physiological stress should be avoided by maintaining normothermia,

minimising fasting and infusing glucose- containing fluids during surgery.

Assess for paralysis on emergence from anaesthesia; patients may remain

paralysed for a prolonged period postoperatively and require mechanical

ventilation.

Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis

this is an autosomal dominant condition. Patients present with se-

vere muscle weakness 2° to hypokalaemia. the focus of treatment is on

maintaining a normal serum K+ level and avoiding hypothermia. Paralysis

should be assessed for on emergence from anaesthesia.

## 頁面 344

RARE CONDitiONS 323

there is a theoretical link between hypokalaemic periodic paralysis

and Mh as both conditions are related to an abnormality in the gene

for the dihydropyridine receptor. Patients have been reported to exhibit

hypermetabolic states following administration of drugs that trigger Mh.

Consider therefore avoiding the use of volatile agents. Suxamethonium

should be avoided in all cases.

Friedreich’s ataxia

An autosomal recessive ataxia characterised by skeletal muscle weakness

and progressive limb ataxia. Cardiac involvement usually leads to death

from cardiac failure. Avoid suxamethonium due to the risk of marked

hyperkalaemia. Diaphragmatic involvement may result in the need for

postoperative ventilation. haemodynamic instability can occur due to myo-

cardial involvement; consider invasive arterial BP monitoring.

Further reading

Marsh S, Pittard A (2011). Neuromuscular disorders and anaesthesia. Part 2: specific neuromuscular

disorders. BJA Educ, 11, 119– 23.

## 頁面 345

324

324 ChAPtER 12 Neurological and muscular disorders

lacigoloruen

ni

snoitaredisnoc

gurD

sredrosid ).11.21

elbat

eeS(

sredrosid

lacigoloruen

cfiiceps

ni

snoitaredisnoc

gurD

11.21

elbaT

stnemmoC

scigrenilohcitnA

gnisiraloped

-noN

muinohtemaxuS

redrosiD

tnaxaler

elcsum

esimorpmoc

yrotaripseR

d

0

esaesid

enoruen

rotoM

aimrehtrepyh

diovA

N

sisorelcs

elpitluM

msinosnikrap

nesrow

taht

sgurd

diovA

noituaC

N

N

esaesid

s’nosnikraP

ainpacopyh

dna

noisnetopyh

diovA

N

0

)aigelpimeh(

EVC

aixeflersyd

cimonotua

rof

evresbO

N

0

yrujni

droc

lanipS

emyzne

citapeh

.dlohserht

eruzies

ecuder

taht

sgurd

diovA

i

/N

N

yspelipE

sRMDN

fo

noitarud

ecuder

yam

noitcudni

ytilibatsni

cimonotuA

d

0

emordnys

érraB

–nialliuG

noissimsnart

ralucsumoruen

htiw

gnirefretni

sgurd

diovA

0

d

i

sivarg

ainehtsayM

## 頁面 346

DRUG CONSiDERAtiONS iN NEUROLOGiCAL DiSORDERS 325

stnemmoC

scigrenilohcitnA

gnisiraloped

-noN

muinohtemaxuS

redrosiD

tnaxaler

elcsum

noitcnufsyd

cimonotuA

d

d

emordnys

notaE

–trebmaL

noitalumits

lacirtcele

dna

lacinahcem

dna

gnirevihs

,dloc

diovA

0

d

0

yhportsyd

cinotoyM

esimorpmoc

caidrac

dna

yrotaripseR

d

0

yhportsyd

ralucsuM

seportoni

evitagen

diovA

N

d

aixata

s’hcierdeirF

esod

latnepoiht

d

d

0

htooT

–eiraM

–tocrahC

gnitsaf

degnolorp

diova

,+K

diovA

d

0

cidoirep

cimealakrepyH

sisylarap

aimrehtomron

dna

aimealakomron

niatniaM

d

0

cidoirep

cimealakopyH

sisylarap

esac

gniwollof

stnemurtsni

lacigrus

dna

yawria

fo

esopsiD

N

N

esaesid

boka

J–tdlefztuerC

ssenlli

lacitirc

gniylrednu

redisnoC

d

0

ssenlli

lacitirC

yhtapoymoruen

ylop

.esod

lamron

,N

;esod

decuder

evig

,d ;esod

rehgih

evig

,i ;diova

tsum

,0

.321

–911

:)4(11

noitacudE

AJB

.sredrosid

ralucsumoruen

cfiiceps

:2

traP

.aisehtseana

dna

sredrosid

ralucsumorueN

.)1102(

;A ,drattiP

;S ,hsraM

morf

atad :ecruoS

## 頁面 347

326

