# Chapter 13: Psychiatric disorders

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 348-363*

---

## 頁面 348

Chapter 13 332277

Psychiatric disorders

Aidan O’Donnell

Psychiatric disorders 328

Antidepressant drugs 330

Antipsychotic drugs 334

Agitated patients on the ward 335

Substance abuse disorder 336

Electroconvulsive therapy 339

See also

% Long- term opioid use and the opioid- dependent patient

pp. 1176–8

## 頁面 349

328

328 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

Psychiatric disorders

the anaesthetic implications of psychiatric illness include:

• Where capacity of the patient to give informed consent may be

impaired (e.g. dementia, mania, psychosis)

• Where the psychiatric illness itself also causes physical illness (e.g.

anorexia nervosa)

• Where the psychiatric medication may interact with anaesthetic drugs

and techniques (e.g. antidepressants).

Some form of psychiatric illness is present in about 10% of the UK popu-

lation at any time, but most patients are usually well-controlled. the com-

monest psychiatric disorder is depression. Many patients are on long-t erm

drug therapy, which should be continued perioperatively where possible.

Major psychiatric illness affects about 1% of the population and carries a

significant risk of self- harm or suicide. Misuse of alcohol and drugs is also

common among the psychiatric population. the stress of hospitalisation for

surgery may exacerbate coexisting psychiatric problems.

Consent

the ability to give consent is assumed unless proven otherwise, as laid

out in the Mental Capacity Act (England and Wales, 2005) and the Adults

with Incapacity Act (Scotland, 2000). Patients who are detained under the

Mental health Act (1983) may be compelled to accept psychiatric treat-

ment (but not other types of treatment) under the terms of the Act. In the

UK and other countries, someone with ‘Lasting Power of Attorney’, previ-

ously Enduring Power of Attorney, may legally give (or withhold) consent

on behalf of a patient who has been deemed to lack capacity. Check for an

advanced decision/d irective (‘living will’) as this may supersede or limit the

powers of the Lasting Power of Attorney.1

Anxiety

Preoperative anxiety is common and can be managed with explanation, re-

assurance, oral premedication, IV sedation (e.g. midazolam 1–2 mg) or a

combination of these. Anxiety disorder may be acute or chronic, or occur

as part of other disorders (e.g. depression). Extreme agitation may make

cannulation difficult. Patients may hyperventilate. higher doses of induction

agents may be required.

Attention-d eficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

this condition is present in 1.4–3 % of children; more common in boys.

Behavioural problems may make children uncooperative at induction, and

disrupted behaviour can be worse for a few days afterward. Children with

severe ADhD are often prescribed methylphenidate, an amphetamine-

like drug, which could theoretically cause them to require i doses of an-

aesthetics. In practice, anaesthesia in this group of children is manageable

without special precautions, and their stability is helped by continuing their

usual medications2 (see also % p. 914).

## 頁面 350

PSyChIAtrIC DISorDErS 329

Dementia

Dementia refers to an irreversible global deterioration in higher mental

functioning. Fifty per cent of cases are due to Alzheimer’s disease.3

• Prevalence: 1% aged 65–7 4, rising to 10% aged >75 and 25% aged >85y.

Slightly more common in women.

• Mean life expectancy is 77y from diagnosis.

• Patients may be unable to give informed consent. In the absence of

a Lasting Power of Attorney, clear documentation of the patient’s

incapacity and reasons to proceed (e.g. the patient’s best interests)

should be made.

• Patients can be confused and may be agitated (occasionally violent) or

profoundly withdrawn.

• Patients with mild to moderate dementia are commonly treated with

anticholinesterase drugs such as donepezil, rivastigmine or galantamine.

these may prolong the action of suxamethonium and partially

antagonise the effects of non- depolarising NMB drugs.

• regional anaesthesia may still be desirable if significant comorbidity;

ketamine (e.g. 5– 20mg IV) may facilitate this and preserves airway

reflexes and BP (titrate to effect). (Midazolam may cause disinhibition,

which may paradoxically worsen agitation.)

• the association between postoperative neurocognitive disorder

(PoND) and dementia remains unclear, but dementia is considered a

risk factor for the development of PoND (see % p. 90).

Anorexia nervosa

Anorexia nervosa is a chronic, severe multisystem disorder, which carries

the highest morbidity and mortality rate of any psychiatric disorder (see

% pp. 86–7).

## 頁面 351

330

330 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

Antidepressant drugs

the aetiology of depression is complex and multifactorial. the monoamine

theory of depression postulates that depression is caused by functional de-

ficiency of serotonin and noradrenaline in the CNS. Manipulation of CNS

monoamines remains the most successful pharmacological approach to de-

pression. Several families of drugs have this effect.4,5

Tricyclic antidepressants

tCAs, such as amitriptyline or imipramine, have largely been superseded by

selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSrIs) (fewer side effects and safer

in overdose) for the treatment of depression. however, tCAs may be used

in the treatment of other problems, e.g. chronic pain. they need to be given

for 2– 4w to become effective.

• tCAs block the reuptake of monoamines (e.g. serotonin,

noradrenaline) from the synaptic cleft by competing for a transport

protein.

• Most have atropine- like side effects: dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary

retention and constipation. other common side effects are sedation,

postural hypotension and delayed gastric emptying.

• they are strongly bound to plasma proteins, and their effects may be

enhanced by competing drugs (e.g. aspirin, warfarin, digoxin).

• In overdose, tCAs cause agitation, delirium, respiratory depression

and coma. Cardiac arrhythmias with prolongation of the Qt interval

are frequent. there is no specific antidote, and treatment is supportive,

although intensive care may be required. Alkalinisation of plasma

reduces the amount of free drug.

• tCAs should not be withdrawn perioperatively.

• i sensitivity to catecholamines may result in hypertension and

arrhythmias, following the administration of sympathomimetic drugs

(adrenaline, noradrenaline). Indirect sympathomimetics (e.g. ephedrine,

metaraminol) should be used with caution.

• Anticholinergic drugs (e.g. atropine) which cross the blood–b rain

barrier may contribute to postoperative confusion.

• Co- administered tramadol increases the risk of serotonin syndrome.

• St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) contains alkaloids which resemble

tCAs in structure and is useful and safe in mild depression, but can also

contribute to serotonin syndrome (see % p. 332).

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors

SSrIs are the most commonly prescribed antidepressants worldwide and

are also prescribed for other conditions, e.g. panic disorder, obsessive–

compulsive disorder. they are highly specific inhibitors of presynaptic

reuptake of serotonin from the synaptic cleft and are much less toxic in

overdose than tCAs. Common examples include fluoxetine, sertraline and

citalopram.

• Common side effects affect the GI tract (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea,

upper GI bleeding) and the CNS (insomnia, agitation, tremor, headache,

sexual dysfunction). CVS side effects are rare (occasional reports of

bradycardia).

• SSrIs may precipitate coronary vasoconstriction in those with IhD.

• Check Na+, especially in the elderly, as SSrIs have been known to cause

hyponatraemia 2° to SIADh (see % p. 242).

## 頁面 352

ANtIDEPrESSANt DrUGS 331

• high doses may impair platelet aggregation and cause prolonged

bleeding times. Check coagulation screen.

• SSrIs inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes, which may prolong or enhance

the activity of other drugs, notably warfarin, theophylline, phenytoin,

carbamazepine, tolbutamide, benzodiazepines (diazepam, midazolam),

type 1c antiarrhythmics (e.g. flecainide), tCAs and some NSAIDs.

• SSrIs may interact with other drugs with serotonergic properties

to cause serotonin syndrome. this includes the opioids tramadol,

pethidine, pentazocine and dextromethorphan.

• SSrI use is common, and anaesthesia usually uneventful.

• Abrupt withdrawal of SSrIs can precipitate a withdrawal syndrome.

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

MAoIs are 3rd- line antidepressants with significant anaesthetic implications

due to their many drug and food reactions. the enzyme MAo is present on

mitochondrial membranes where it inactivates monoamine neurotransmit-

ters in the cytoplasm. It has two isoenzymes MAo- A and MAo- B.

• MAo- A preferentially metabolises serotonin, noradrenaline and

adrenaline, and predominates in the CNS. MAo- B preferentially

metabolises non- polar trace amines such as the neurotransmitter

phenethylamine. It predominates in the liver, lungs and non-n eural cells.

• Dopamine and tyramine (found in cheese and other foods) are

substrates for both MAo- A and MAo- B.

• the older MAoIs phenelzine, tranylcypromine and isocarboxazid bind

covalently to MAo. regeneration of new enzyme takes 2–3 w. Ideally,

they should be stopped at least 2w prior to surgery. this may provoke

relapses in symptoms and should not be done without consultation with

a senior psychiatrist. If stopped for <2w, patients should be considered

as still on MAoI.

• Phenelzine decreases plasma cholinesterase levels and prolongs the

action of suxamethonium.

• Newer drugs are reversible inhibitors of monoamine oxidase A

(rIMAs). Moclobemide is the only rIMA available in the UK and can be

omitted safely for 24h preoperatively.

• Linezolid (antibiotic) is a non- selective reversible MAoI.

• Selegiline is a MAo- B inhibitor used in PD. At doses of <10mg/ d, it

is not necessary to stop it preoperatively as there is no reaction with

sympathomimetics. Pethidine, however, should still be avoided.

• Methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) has MAoI properties.

• Indirect sympathomimetics (ephedrine, metaraminol, amphetamine,

cocaine, tyramine) are metabolised by MAo and may have a greatly

exaggerated effect. Displacing noradrenaline from neurotransmitter

vesicles can cause a life- threatening hypertensive crisis.

• Direct sympathomimetics (e.g. noradrenaline, adrenaline,

phenylephrine, methoxamine, dopamine, dobutamine, isoprenaline)

may have an exaggerated effect and should be used with caution.

• treat hypotension initially with IV fluid, then with cautious doses of

phenylephrine (e.g. 10– 20 micrograms).

• opioid drugs: MAoIs can inhibit hepatic microsomal enzymes,

prolonging the action of opioids and enhancing their effect.

## 頁面 353

332

332 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

• Pethidine is contraindicated with all MAoIs because of the risk of

serotonin syndrome. Avoid tramadol and dextromethorphan, which

also have serotonergic properties.

• LA drugs (except cocaine) are safe (caution if contain adrenaline). Axial

and regional blocks are ideal; however, hypotension should be treated

cautiously. Felypressin is a satisfactory alternative to adrenaline if a

vasoconstrictor is required.

• Anticholinergic drugs (atropine, glycopyrronium) are safe.

Serotonin syndrome

Serotonin syndrome is a toxic crisis resulting from i synaptic levels of

serotonin in the brainstem and spinal cord due to overdose of SSrIs or a

combination of other drugs affecting serotonin (especially tCAs, MAoIs,

pethidine and tramadol). It presents as a clinical triad:

• Alteration in behaviour (agitation, confusion)

• Abnormal motor activity (rigidity, myoclonus, hyperreflexia)

• Autonomic instability (pyrexia, tachycardia, diarrhoea, unstable BP).

It may progress to seizures, oculogyric crises, DIC, rhabdomyolysis,

myoglobinuria, AKI, arrhythmia, coma and death. It may mimic the neuro-

leptic malignant syndrome (see % p. 334) (table 13.1)6 and Mh. the patient

is likely to require intensive care. treatment is mainly supportive, and the

episode usually lasts <24h.4,6

Lithium

Lithium is an inorganic ion used as a mood stabiliser in the treatment of

bipolar affective disorder. It has a low therapeutic ratio, with an optimal

plasma concentration of 0.4– 1.0mmol/ L.7

• Chronic use causes weight gain, renal impairment and hypothyroidism.

• Lithium toxicity occurs at >1.5mmol/ L and is exacerbated by

hyponatraemia, diuretic therapy and renal disease. Features include

lethargy, restlessness, nausea, vomiting, thirst, tremor, polyuria, renal

failure, ataxia, convulsions, coma and death. haemodialysis is effective.

• Lithium potentiates both depolarising and non- depolarising NMB; nerve

stimulator monitoring should be used.

• Lithium may cause t-wave flattening or inversion, but clinically

important CVS effects are rare.

• NSAIDs should be used with caution (risk of exacerbating renal

impairment and causing toxicity).

## 頁面 354

ANtIDEPrESSANt DrUGS 333

Table 13.1 Comparison of serotonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignant

syndrome

Serotonin syndrome Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

Cause Serotonergic drugs (MAoIs, Not clear, but likely to involve

tCAs, SSrIs, stimulants, dopamine receptor blockade

ondansetron, St John’s (typical and atypical antipsychotics,

wort) metoclopramide, promethazine,

prochlorperazine)

Features tachycardia tachycardia

tachypnoea tachypnoea

hypertension hypertension

hypersalivation hypersalivation

hyperthermia hyperthermia

Coma Coma

hyperreflexia + clonus hyporeflexia

Dilated pupils Normal pupils

i bowel sounds d or normal bowel sounds

i tone (especially in lower Lead- pipe rigidity

limbs)

treatment Discontinue causative drugs Discontinue causative drugs

Supportive treatment Supportive treatment

Short- acting drugs (e.g. Control BP (e.g. clonidine, esmolol)

esmolol) to control BP Fluid to prevent renal failure

If hypotensive, can give associated with rhabdomyolysis

noradrenaline, adrenaline Benzodiazepines for agitation

or phenylephrine Active cooling if needed

Benzodiazepines for Amantadine, bromocriptine and

agitation dantrolene (avoid if LFts deranged)

Active cooling if needed have all been used

Cyproheptadine 12mg Po

if supportive care fails

## 頁面 355

334

334 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

Antipsychotic drugs

Antipsychotic drugs

Antipsychotic drugs (formerly known as neuroleptics) include haloperidol,

chlorpromazine, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone, and are used in the

treatment of schizophrenia and similar disorders. their main action is antag-

onism at CNS dopamine (D) receptors, but most antagonise other recep-

2

tors, including histamine (h), serotonin (5- ht), acetylcholine (muscarinic)

1 2

and α- adrenergic receptors. Many have antiemetic effects.4,5

• Common side effects include sedation, extrapyramidal motor

disturbances and tardive dyskinesia with chronic use. Less common

side effects include gynaecomastia, weight gain, postural hypotension,

antimuscarinic effects, obstructive jaundice and agranulocytosis (rare,

but severe).

• Many drugs prolong the Qt interval, especially when combined with

other drugs which may do the same (e.g. antidepressants).

• Clozapine is associated with a risk of agranulocytosis.

• Abrupt withdrawal of antipsychotic medication is dangerous.

• Antipsychotic drugs potentiate sedative and hypotensive effects of

anaesthetic agents (including opioids).

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

A rare idiosyncratic reaction to antipsychotic drugs which resembles Mh

and serotonin syndrome (see % p. 332) (table 13.1). typical patients are

young ♂ . Features include hyperthermia, tachycardia, extrapyramidal dys-

function (rigidity, dystonia) and autonomic dysfunction (sweating, labile BP,

salivation, urinary incontinence). CK and WCC are raised. Patients should

be treated in the ICU. Mortality approaches 20%.6

## 頁面 356

AGItAtED PAtIENtS oN thE WArD 335

Agitated patients on the ward

Anaesthetists may be asked to help with sedation of agitated patients on

general wards and are more likely to be familiar with the effects of sedation

than junior medical or surgical staff.

• Patients are likely to be in an acute confusional state or delirium,

exacerbated by pain, unfamiliar/t hreatening surroundings and strangers.

they may be disoriented, agitated, disinhibited or violent, and may

experience visual or auditory hallucinations.

• When presentation is acute in a previously lucid patient, the cause is

usually organic. Establishing and treating the cause may remove the

need for sedation.

• Exclude hypoglycaemia, hypoxia, pain, alcohol withdrawal and a full

bladder.

• Differential diagnosis includes infection (chest, urine, lines), drugs

(cocaine, LSD, sedatives, analgesics) and metabolic derangement (e.g.

hyponatraemia, hypoglycaemia). Less frequently: head injury, CVE,

acute psychiatric disorder (e.g. mania) and acute porphyria.

Approach to the patient

• Ensure the safety of yourself and other staff. A calm and reassuring

approach will help the patient and any onlookers.

• If physical restraint is necessary, ensure plenty of help is available

(hospital security, porters and even the police) and discuss with a

psychiatrist.

• Establish venous access, if possible, and bandage the cannula.

• Aim to render the patient calm and cooperative, rather than

unconscious.

• Do not leave a sedated patient unattended.

Drug therapy

• haloperidol 5mg IV initially (reduce dose in the elderly, e.g. 1mg).

repeat after 5min if required. titrate to effect. Maximum dose: 18mg/

24h, according to BNF, but higher doses are occasionally warranted.

• Midazolam 1–2 mg IV may also be useful (titrate to effect). May cause

paradoxical disinhibition, especially in the elderly.

• Alcohol withdrawal: give diazepam 5– 10mg IV (or chlordiazepoxide

50mg Po), and repeat as required.

• Ketamine is useful in emergencies if the patient is extremely violent or

dangerous. Give 0.5– 1mg/ kg IV (or 5– 10mg/ kg IM).

• Do not use propofol (too short- acting), opioids (respiratory

depression) or drugs with which you may be unfamiliar. Clonidine may

provoke hypotension.

• In ED, or where the history is unknown, further investigation (e.g. Ct

scan) may be appropriate. In this circumstance, rSI of anaesthesia with

full monitoring may be required.

## 頁面 357

336

336 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

Substance abuse disorder

General considerations

In the UK, about 10% of adults have used an illegal drug in the past year.

Misuse of street drugs occurs in all socioeconomic groups. A substance

abuse disorder (SAD) exists when the extent and pattern of substance use

interfere with the psychological and sociocultural integrity of the person.

Patients with SAD may be abusing CNS depressant drugs (alcohol, benzodi-

azepines, opioids) or CNS stimulant drugs (cocaine, amphetamines, ecstasy,

cannabinoids).

• Acute intoxication may impede informed consent. In addition, the

effects of the drug may counteract (stimulants) or enhance (sedatives)

the effects of anaesthetic drugs. Consider drug misuse in all patients

with a reduced conscious level or requiring emergency surgery and

anaesthesia.

• Chronic drug misuse is associated with poor nutrition, medical and

psychiatric comorbidity and the presence of viral infections.

• IV drug users often have no accessible veins. IV drug misuse is

associated with IV infective complications. hIV and viral hepatitis are the

commonest. Bacterial endocarditis is rare but serious, and associated

with pulmonary abscesses, embolic phenomena from vegetations and

vasculitis.

• Drugs in common use fall into several groups (table 13.2).

Combinations of drugs are common, often with alcohol. Street drugs

may be impure or deliberately adulterated with other substances.

• Anaesthetists may be at elevated risk of SAD (see % p. 16).

Table 13.2 Street drugs in common use

Drug Clinical signs

Cannabis tachycardia, abnormal affect (e.g. euphoria, anxiety, panic or

psychosis), poor memory, fatigue

Stimulants: cocaine, tachycardia, labile BP, excitement, delirium, hallucinations,

amphetamines, hyperreflexia, tremors, convulsions, mydriasis, sweating,

ecstasy hyperthermia, exhaustion, coma

hallucinogens: Sympathomimetic, weakly analgesic, altered judgement,

LSD, phencyclidine, hallucinations, toxic psychosis, dissociative anaesthesia

ketamine

opioids: morphine, Euphoria, respiratory depression, hypotension, bradycardia,

heroin, oxycodone constipation, pinpoint pupils, coma

Anaesthetic considerations in patients with SAD8

• Keep a high index of suspicion, especially in trauma.

• Difficult venous access: IV drug users may be able to direct you to

a patent vein. Consider ultrasound scanning (USS) for vein location;

rarely, the patient may need central venous cannulation. Consider

inhalational induction.

• take full precautions against infection risk.

## 頁面 358

SUBStANCE ABUSE DISorDEr 337

• Plan postoperative analgesia with the patient preoperatively.

• Do not attempt drug withdrawal perioperatively.

• Effective management of acute pain in patients with SAD may be

complicated by:

• Psychological and behavioural characteristics

• Presence of the drug of abuse and morbidities related to it

• Physical dependence (physiological phenomenon characterised by a

withdrawal reaction when the drug is withdrawn or an antagonist is

administered) and the risk of withdrawal

• Medications used to assist with drug withdrawal or rehabilitation

• Ethical dilemmas arising as a result of the need to balance concerns of

undermedication against anxieties about safety and possible abuse or

diversion of the drugs.

• Management of pain in patients with SAD should focus on prevention

of withdrawal, effective analgesia and symptomatic treatment of

affective and behavioural problems.

Opioids

(See % pp. 1157–60.)

Cannabis8,9

Cannabis is cheap and widely available, and consumption is common, usu-

ally by smoking. the active ingredients have a very long half-l ife, but toxicity

seems to be low. Evidence for the medicinal benefits of cannabinoids (e.g.

for analgesia) is sparse. In practice, ordinary cannabis use causes few prob-

lems for anaesthetists.

• Do not prescribe purified cannabinoids for analgesia.

Cocaine and crack cocaine8,9

Cocaine is usually ‘sniffed’ in powder form. Free- base (‘crack’) cocaine is

heat- stable and can be smoked. Frequent cocaine use predisposes to di-

lated cardiomyopathy due to microinfarcts from small- vessel ischaemia,

which may be asymptomatic in its early stages.

• Cocaine’s effects are mediated by central and peripheral adrenergic

stimulation. Most of the life- threatening side effects of cocaine

(including MI and CVE) are due to vasospasm and can be treated using

combinations of vasodilators, antiarrhythmic agents and α/β - blockers

titrated against effect, using full invasive monitoring.

• Avoid vasoconstrictors (including those in LA preparations):

hypertensive crisis may result. If vasopressors are required in theatre,

use very small doses, and titrate against response.

• Accidental intra- arterial injection of cocaine can cause critical limb

and organ ischaemia. Successful treatment has included aggressive

anticoagulation, thrombolysis and vasodilator therapy.

• Use caution in instrumenting the airway or nasopharynx, as chronic

nasal use can cause perforation of the nasal septum or soft palate.

Amphetamines8,9

• Includes MDMA (‘ecstasy’) as well as methamphetamine (‘meth’).

• Amphetamines mimic endogenous monoamines and cause excitation

and euphoria. toxicity is treated symptomatically. Labetalol is effective

in controlling BP. Beware of hyperthermia and dehydration.

## 頁面 359

338

338 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

Alcohol10,11

Alcohol use is common and causes problems as a result of both acute in-

toxication and the health effects of chronic consumption. Ask all adults

about alcohol consumption. Surgery should be avoided, if possible, in the

acutely intoxicated as consent is difficult.

• Ketoacidosis may present after binge drinking, in association with

vomiting and fasting. Blood alcohol levels may already have normalised.

• Acute intoxication may cause vomiting, dehydration, hypoglycaemia

and delayed gastric emptying. Careful rehydration, with attention to

electrolytes and glucose, and rSI are advised.

• Chronic alcohol excess induces tolerance to GA and is associated with

an increase in postoperative complications, including infection.

• Alcoholic cardiomyopathy is characterised by a dilated, hypokinetic LV

and d EF. Patients may present with CCF and oedema, exacerbated by

low serum albumin. Consider echocardiography.

• Alcoholic liver disease: the earliest form is reversible fatty liver,

progressing to alcoholic hepatitis (abdominal pain, weight loss, jaundice,

fever) and later cirrhosis (jaundice, ascites, portal hypertension, hepatic

failure). Correct clotting abnormalities preoperatively. X-m atch blood.

Patients with liver failure may require intensive care if surgery is planned

(see also % pp. 205–10).

• Consider IV thiamine to reduce the risk of Wernicke’s encephalopathy.

• Anticipate alcohol withdrawal symptoms. Most patients can tolerate

24h abstinence perioperatively— many hospitals have benzodiazepine

regimens to prevent withdrawal syndrome.

• Seizures are most commonly seen 6– 48h after cessation of drinking,

typically tonic– clonic. Several fits over a period of a few days are

common. Low K+ and Mg2+ predispose. Seizures may be preceded

by disorientation and agitation (delirium tremens). treat with

benzodiazepines, e.g. diazepam 10mg IV, repeated as required.

## 頁面 360

ELECtroCoNVULSIVE thErAPy 339

Electroconvulsive therapy

Procedure Electrically induced seizure

time 5– 10min

Pain ±

Position Supine

Blood loss Nil

Practical technique Short IV GA, face mask only, bite- block

General considerations

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECt) is safe and effective in the treatment of

mental disorders, most commonly severe depression unresponsive to

drugs, or where there is self-n eglect or a high risk of suicide. ECt is com-

monly carried out in an isolated site— ensure skilled assistance, adequate

monitoring and resuscitation facilities. Anaesthetic equipment may be older

or unfamiliar.12

Physiological effects of electroconvulsive therapy

During the seizure, there is parasympathetic hyperactivity, bradycardia and

hypotension, lasting about 15s, followed by a more prolonged (5min) sym-

pathetic stimulation: tachycardia, hypertension, dysrhythmias and i myo-

cardial o requirement. During this time, there is also i ICP, cerebral blood

2

flow and cerebral o requirement. there may also be hypersalivation,

2

i intragastric pressure, i intraocular pressure (IoP) and occasionally

incontinence.13

Preoperative

A careful preoperative assessment (including investigations) should be

undertaken, as for any GA. Consent is normally arranged by the psychiatry

team. ECt is typically given twice weekly for several weeks, reducing in

frequency as the patient improves. read the notes for documentation of

previous problems.

• Absolute contraindications: recent MI or CVE, phaeochromocytoma,

intracranial mass lesion, intracranial or aortic aneurysm.

• relative contraindications: uncontrolled angina, CCF, severe

osteoporosis, major bone fracture, glaucoma, retinal detachment. ECt

during pregnancy is acceptable.

• Avoid sedative premedication, which is anticonvulsant.

• Glycopyrronium (0.1– 0.3mg IV) may be used to reduce secretions and

to counteract bradycardia. Consider antacids if history of reflux.

Perioperative

Efficacy of ECt is dependent on seizure quality, as measured by EEG-

derived variables, rather than just on duration. there is no further benefit

beyond about 60s of seizure time. Good technique provides short GA,

muscle relaxation to lessen the risk of trauma, attenuation of physiological

effects and rapid recovery.12,13,14

• thorough preoxygenation is recommended.

• All GAs shorten the seizure in a dose- related fashion; use light doses.

## 頁面 361

340

340 ChAPtEr 13 Psychiatric disorders

• Any traditional induction agent may be used for induction. Propofol

attenuates the sympathetic response but shortens the seizure

more than the others. Etomidate shortens the seizure less, but

the sympathetic response may be more pronounced. Inhalational

sevoflurane is effective but takes longer.

• the combination of a small dose of propofol with remifentanil (1

microgram/ kg) provides good conditions and attenuation of the

sympathetic response. A combination of ketamine and propofol is

sometimes used.

• Suxamethonium (0.5– 1mg/ kg) is given to ‘modify’ the seizure (reduces

muscle power to prevent injury). Mivacurium (0.2mg/ kg) may be

used instead but will probably require reversal. the combination of

rocuronium and sugammadex is also effective.

• Insert a bite- block to prevent damage to the mouth and teeth.

• Maintain the airway with a face mask and/o r oral airway. hand- ventilate

the patient with o until breathing resumes afterward.

2

• the psychiatrist may titrate the magnitude of the stimulus to the quality

of the seizure; be prepared to maintain the anaesthetic with further

boluses of induction agent if a 2nd stimulus is required.

• Sympathetic response may also be attenuated with alfentanil (10

micrograms/ kg) or esmolol (e.g. 0.25mg/ kg). Labetalol, sodium

nitroprusside and hydralazine have also been used.

• Seizure augmentation: both caffeine and theophylline lower the seizure

threshold and prolong the seizure. Moderate hyperventilation with bag

and mask before the seizure is also somewhat effective.

• If the seizure lasts longer than 60s, it should be terminated, e.g. with

propofol titrated to response.

Postoperative

• Post- ictal agitation, confusion or aggression may occur in some patients.

they should be nursed in a calm environment and may occasionally

require sedation (e.g. midazolam 1mg IV).

• headache and muscle pains are commonly reported and usually

respond to simple analgesics.

• Drowsiness and cognitive impairment are very common but typically

resolve within a few hours.

• No evidence of memory loss is demonstrable at 6mo. however,

patients sometimes complain of memory loss for specific life events.

• other complications include nausea, exacerbation of IhD, fractures/

dislocations, dental/ oral injury and laryngospasm.

• ECt does not increase the risk of other types of seizure.

• overall mortality is about 1 per 80 000 treatments.

## 頁面 362

ELECtroCoNVULSIVE thErAPy 341

References

1 yentis SM, hartle AJ, Barker Ir, et al. (2017). AAGBI: consent for anaesthesia 2017: Association

of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. Anaesthesia, 72, 93– 105.

2 Cartabuke rS, tobias JD, rice J, et al. (2017). hemodynamic profile and behavioral character-

istics during induction of anesthesia in pediatric patients with attention deficit hyperactivity dis-

order. Paediatr Anaesth, 27, 417– 24.

3 Needham MJ, Webb CE, Bryden DC (2017). Postoperative cognitive dysfunction and dementia:

what we need to know and do. Br J Anaesth, 119(S1), i115– 25.

4 Saraghi M, Golden Lr, hersh EV (2017). Anesthetic considerations for patients on antidepres-

sant therapy—P art I. Anesth Prog, 64, 253– 61.

5 Peck t, Wong A, Norman E (2010). Anaesthetic implications of psychoactive drugs. Contin Educ

Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 10, 177– 81.

6 Bartakke A, Corredor C, van rensburg A (2020). Serotonin syndrome in the perioperative

period. BJA Educ, 20, 10– 17.

7 Flood S, Bodenham A (2010). Lithium: mimicry, mania, and muscle relaxants. Contin Educ Anaesth

Crit Care Pain, 10, 77– 80.

8 Beaulieu P (2017). Anesthetic implications of recreational drug use. Can J Anesth, 64, 1236– 64.

9 roberts tN, thompson JP (2013). Illegal substances in anaesthetic and intensive care practices.

Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 13, 42– 6.

10 Blincoe t, Chambler D (2019). Alcohol and anaesthesia. Br J Hosp Med, 80, 485.

11 Chapman r, Plaat F (2009). Alcohol and anaesthesia. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 9, 10– 13.

12 Bwalya GM, Bajekal r, Waite J (2019). Anaesthesia for electroconvulsive therapy. In: Ferrier

IN, Waite J (eds). the ECt handbook, 4th edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; pp.

202– 10.

13 Uppal V, Dourish J, Macfarlane A (2010). Anaesthesia for electroconvulsive therapy. Contin Educ

Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 10, 192– 6.

14 Weiss A, hussain S, Ng B, et al. (2019). royal Australian and New Zealand College of

Psychiatrists professional practice guidelines for the administration of electroconvulsive therapy.

Aust N Z J Psychiatry, 7, 609– 23.

## 頁面 363

342

