# Chapter 14: Getting started

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 364-381*

---

## 頁面 364

Chapter 14 334433

Getting started

Mincho Marroquin- Harris

Getting started 344

Anaesthetic gases 345

Anaesthetic machine 348

Breathing systems 350

Ventilation 352

Airway equipment 355

Long- term venous access 359

## 頁面 365

344

344 ChApter 14 Getting started

Getting started

A thorough working knowledge of anaesthetic equipment is essential for

safe and effective anaesthetic practice. Although many different types of

equipment are in use throughout the world, a few basic principles underlie

the functions of nearly all of them.

## 頁面 366

AnAesthetiC GAses 345

Anaesthetic gases

Piped medical gases and scavenging system (PMGSS)

the pMGss is part of the hospital infrastructure and supplies clinical areas

with compressed O and vacuum. Operating theatres are also supplied with

2

nO, medical air and gas scavenging.

2

• the pMGss is a system of seamless copper alloy pipes. pipes are

cleaned, degreased and free of particulate matter. Colour- coding is used

on the outside of pipes at set intervals. these pipes supply the terminal

gas outlets in clinical areas.

• terminal outlets are labelled and colour- coded, and have self- sealing

schrader valves to prevent gas leakage. each gas has a specific outlet

shape and diameter to prevent misconnection of equipment to the

wrong outlet.

• Alarms are activated in case of gas failure with low pressure (<370kpa)

and at high pressures (>500kpa).

• isolation valves located in theatre complexes allow pMGss to be turned

off in case of leak, fire or other emergency.

• Most incidents occur just following installation rather than during long-

term use. Consequently, after installation or modifications, an inspection

process is performed to ensure the correct gases are being supplied to

wall outlets.

• safety standards and colour codes for medical gas supplies for both

pipeline and cylinder storage conform to international Organization

for standardization (isO) requirements. the Us (and hence the airline

industry) observes its own colour scheme, in which O is colour- coded

2

green.

Oxygen

O

2

is stored in bulk for hospital supply, either in a vacuum- insulated evapor-

ator (Vie) or in a cylinder manifold.

Vacuum- insulated evaporator

the Vie is the typical main O store for most hospitals and is a large tank of

2

liquid O. One litre of liquid O can provide >800L of gaseous O. typically,

2 2 2

the Vie is sized to hold 200–1 000L. in order to maintain its liquid state, the

Vie stores O at –1 83°C at a pressure of 1050kpa. prior to entering the

2

pMGss, O flows through a pressure regulator to provide a supply pressure

2

of 400kpa.

Cylinder manifold

A cylinder manifold consists of two banks of cylinders which are at least size

G (table 14.1). When one bank of cylinders is exhausted, a reduction in

pressure will automatically open the 2nd bank, ensuring ongoing gas supply.

Cylinder supply

O is available in individual portable cylinders of various sizes. since O is a

2 2

gas in the cylinder, the gauge pressure is directly proportional to the quan-

tity in the cylinder. traditional steel cylinders are pressurised to 13 700kpa,

but more modern materials allow higher pressures in the cylinder. A type e

cylinder at 13 700kpa contains 680L of gaseous O.

2

## 頁面 367

346

346 ChApter 14 Getting started

Nitrous oxide

nO for hospitals is often stored in a cylinder manifold, though smaller fa-

2

cilities may mount a nO cylinder on the back of the anaesthetic machine.

2

the mains pressure of nO is 400kpa.

2

• nO is stored as a liquid in the cylinder at 4500kpa. the gauge pressure

2

is not proportional to the quantity in the cylinder.

• high ambient temperatures could cause the nO cylinder to explode.

2

therefore, the cylinder is only partially filled with liquid to allow for

some expansion.

Medical air

Medical air is atmospheric air which is dehydrated and ultrafiltered to re-

move particulates. it can be supplied by an air compressor, in cylinder form

or as ‘synthetic air’ blended from gaseous O and nitrogen. it is often sup-

2

plied at two mains pressures: 700kpa to drive surgical tools, and 400kpa for

medical and anaesthetic uses.

Medical gas cylinders

Under the isO standard, all medical gas cylinders have a white body. the con-

tents of the cylinder are denoted by the colour of the shoulder (table 14.1).

newer materials allow the cylinders to be light and sustain high internal

pressures. A pin- index system prevents the incorrect gas from being con-

nected to the yoke of the anaesthetic machine.

Table 14.1 Description of medical gas cylinders*

Shoulder colour Pressure when steel cylinder is

full (kPa)

O White 13 700

2

Air White/ black 13 700

nO French blue 4500(maintains this pressure until

2

almost empty)

entonox® Blue/ white 13 700

heliox® Brown/ white 13 700

(28% O, 72% helium)

2

CO Grey 5000

2

* some suppliers may vary. Check product information.

Vacuum system

the vacuum system includes both medical suction and scavenging for anaes-

thetic gases. the suction for both systems is provided by electrical pumps,

so it is susceptible to power outage.

Medical vacuum

provides high vacuum to suction for sputum or blood. A pressure of –4 0kpa

or below is provided with a sustained flow of at least 40L/ min.

• suctioned material is collected in a reservoir to prevent contamination

of the pMGss.

• Loss of suction pressure can occur from disconnection/l eak in the

apparatus, blockage of filter or excessive demand.

## 頁面 368

AnAesthetiC GAses 347

The anaesthetic gas scavenging system

removes expelled anaesthetic gases to minimise exposure of staff in the

operating room.

• provides high flow (80–1 30L/ min) just below atmospheric pressure.

• Gases released from the adjustable pressure-l imiting (ApL) valve or

expiratory port of the ventilator are collected in a reservoir before

passing to the disposal system and ultimately vented to the atmosphere.

• A flow indicator on the side of the anaesthetic machine shows that the

scavenging system is working within safe flow rates.

• tubing connectors for the vacuum systems are sized specifically so that

they cannot be accidentally attached to airway equipment.

## 頁面 369

348

348 ChApter 14 Getting started

Anaesthetic machine

the continuous- flow anaesthetic machine receives a supply of high-

pressure gases, reduces the pressure to safe levels and provides accurate

and controlled flow of gases and vapour to the patient via a breathing

system (Fig. 14.1).

High- pressure system

takes high- pressure gas (from cylinders or wall outlets) and steps it down

to the working pressure of the machine, at the flow-c ontrol valves or flow-

meters. in older machines, this is mechanical; newer machines feature elec-

tronic control of the process.

• Gas pressures from the pMGss are measured and reduced by

regulators. Valves ensure flow is unidirectional.

• safety features include antihypoxia and low-p ressure alarms. if the O

2

supply fails, the supply of nO is also stopped.

2

Low- pressure system

extends from the flow-c ontrol valves/ flowmeters to the common gas

outlet. in modern anaesthetic machines, the flow and composition of gases

are set digitally. Gases are regulated electronically based on feedback from

electronic flow and gas-c ontent sensors. traditional anaesthetic machines

use flowmeters. Flow is adjusted by a control knob and displayed by the

height of a rotating bobbin in a fluted glass column. Flowmeter controls are

labelled and colour-c oded, and the O control is distinguishable by touch.

2

Vaporisers

provide precise concentrations of volatile agents. traditional variable-b ypass

plenum vaporisers are calibrated mechanical devices. newer vaporisers are

electronically controlled. some devices are not vaporisers in the strictest

sense such as the dual- circuit gas- vapour blenders used for desflurane or

the direct- injection devices which inject precise amounts of volatile into the

gas flow under electronic control.

Common gas outlet

this is the final pathway of gases and volatile agents out of the machine.

it is standardised with a 22mm external and 15mm internal connector.

traditionally, the breathing attachment was connected here, but in many

modern machines, the connection is internal and the common gas outlet

is absent.

Oxygen flush

• rapidly provides 100% O to the common gas outlet at high flow (30–

2

75L/ min). this O bypasses the low- pressure system and contains no

2

anaesthetic gases. the high flow and pressure have the potential for

causing barotrauma.

• Many machines feature an auxiliary O outlet with its own flowmeter.

2

however, the O has the same source as the common gas outlet and

2

should not be used if there is a problem with this supply.

## 頁面 370

AnAesthetiC MAChine 349

Fig. 14.1 simplified schematic of a continuous- flow anaesthetic machine.

Further reading

hartle A, Anderson e, Bythell V (2012). Checking anaesthetic equipment 2012. Anaesthesia,

67, 660– 8.

## 頁面 371

350

350 ChApter 14 Getting started

Breathing systems

For paediatric breathing systems, see % pp. 910–12. in anaesthesia, many

different breathing attachments are used to bridge the gap from the an-

aesthetic machine to the patient. One of the commonest examples in use

is the circle breathing circuit, as it is versatile and efficient (Fig. 14.2). it

comprises an inspiratory limb, an expiratory limb, a reservoir bag, a valve

and a CO absorber. Gas flows via the inspiratory limb to the patient via a

2

Y- piece, then leaves via the expiratory limb. exhaled gas is recycled through

the CO absorber, which allows very economic use of anaesthetic gases

2

and agents. this, in turn, minimises atmospheric pollution. the recycling of

expired gases allows heat and moisture to be conserved.

Features of the circle system

• Low- resistance corrugated tubing has low compliance and low

resistance. tubing connectors have standard 22mm (external) and

15mm (internal) dimensions.

• Unidirectional (‘flutter’) valves are present on both limbs and prevent

backflow. Moisture may accumulate on the expiratory valve, making it

sticky.

• the ApL valve allows the anaesthetist to adjust the pressure in the

system during manual ventilation.

• the reservoir bag allows hand ventilation, manual appreciation of

airway compliance and visualisation of sV.

• the CO absorber (containing pellets of predominantly calcium

2

hydroxide) is located on the expiratory limb. it chemically removes CO

2

in an exothermic reaction which also produces water vapour.

Other adjuncts and considerations

• An O analyser is always positioned on the inspiratory limb.

2

• the heat and moisture exchange (hMe) filter was designed to prevent

particulate material from being inadvertently inhaled. Modern filter

technology provides an effective bacterial and viral barrier. the

hMe filter minimises loss of heat and moisture to dry fresh gas by

providing up to 70% relative humidity. it functions poorly at high minute

ventilation and low temperatures.

• A CO and volatile sampling line often attaches to, or near, the hMe

2

filter .

• At steady state and in ideal conditions, the fresh gas flow (FGF) can be

reduced to provide the patient’s basal O requirement (e.g. 250mL/

2

min) plus some volatile. however, at low flows, most of the gas the

patient receives is their own recycled expired gas. H this can result

in the patient receiving lower FiO and anaesthetic agents than those

2

selected. some machines offer electronic control of FiO and end- tidal

2

volatile concentrations. higher FGF is recommended at induction of

anaesthesia to ensure MAC is reached rapidly.

• paediatric circle systems have a small (e.g. 500mL) reservoir bag and

narrower tubing.

## 頁面 372

BreAthinG sYsteMs 351

Fig. 14.2 Layout of a circle breathing attachment. reproduced from Brockwell rC:

inhaled Anesthetic Delivery systems. in Miller rD (ed): Anesthesia, 6th ed, p 295. philadelphia,

Churchill Livingstone, 2004, with permission from elsevier.

Semi-c losed breathing attachments

the efficiency and versatility of the circle system have led to it being used

almost universally. however, there are two main drawbacks: complexity

of design and resistance to breathing. there is still a role for simpler semi-

closed breathing systems. these were classified by WW Mapleson in 1954,

but all require FGF far higher than the circle system to prevent rebreathing

of exhaled CO.

2

the Mapleson F attachment is a modified t- piece with an open- ended

reservoir bag. it is still favoured among anaesthetists for infants, because

of its extremely low resistance to gas flow and the ability to hand- ventilate

with great precision and sensitivity.

## 頁面 373

352

352 ChApter 14 Getting started

Ventilation

Self- inflating bag

the self- inflating resuscitation bag allows the anaesthetist to deliver positive

pressure ventilation without an O source, e.g. ventilation outside of the

2

operating theatre, resuscitation of a collapsed casualty or in case of venti-

lator malfunction. A self-i nflating bag should always be immediately available

in theatre.

• there are several brands with different sized bags, typically adults 1.5–

2L and paediatrics 250mL to 1L bags.

• A unidirectional valve controls the direction of flow and prevents

rebreathing of CO. there is little apparatus dead space. the casing is

2

clear, allowing the valve to be assessed during an equipment check.

• A peep valve may be applied to the expiratory port.

• the patient end of the self-i nflating bag can be connected to anaesthetic

face masks, etts or LMAs.

• When a face mask is attached, it is recommended to use 15L/m in of O

2

which may splint the unidirectional valve slightly open, reducing work of

breathing. Otherwise spontaneous breaths should be assisted due to i

work of breathing through the unidirectional valve.

• the bag reinflates with room air, but an O line and a reservoir bag can

2

be added. high FiO is possible with a good seal.

2

Mechanical ventilation

the goal of mechanical ventilation in the anaesthetised patient is to support

adequate gas exchange and minimise iatrogenic injury.

Modes of ventilation

When patient- centred outcomes are considered, no particular ventilation

mode has been shown to be better than another. Modern ventilators offer

a large variety of electronically controlled modes, the terminology of which

varies between manufacturers. Mandatory modes tend to ignore any re-

spiratory effort from the patient, but triggered (supportive) modes permit

the patient to initiate a breath, which is then augmented by the ventilator.

Volume control ventilation

Volume control ventilation is a mandatory mode of ventilation where the

anaesthetist sets a desired V and rr. this mode is tolerant of changes in

T

respiratory compliance, though any d in compliance may lead to i airway

pressures, and volume control ventilation usually delivers higher pressures

for the same V, compared to pressure control ventilation. the mode is

T

usually intolerant of leaks.

Pressure control ventilation

pressure control ventilation is a mandatory mode where the anaesthetist

sets the pressure to be delivered and the rr. this mode is tolerant of small

leaks, but any d in respiratory compliance will lead to d in V.

T

Pressure control ventilation, volume guaranteed (PCV- VG)

this is a mandatory mode of ventilation which attempts to provide the

advantages of both pressure control ventilation and volume control ven-

tilation, delivering a set V at the lowest possible pressure. this allows for

T

relatively constant V despite changes in respiratory compliance.

T

## 頁面 374

VentiLAtiOn 353

Pressure support ventilation

pressure support ventilation is a triggered mode of ventilation. the ven-

tilator senses when the patient initiates a breath and then delivers a set

pulse of positive pressure to augment the respiratory effort. supporting the

patient’s breathing in this way may reduce work of breathing and potentially

improve oxygenation by increasing mean inspiratory pressure. the patient

determines the rr with no backup rate, so prolonged apnoea may occur if

the patient does not trigger the ventilator.

Synchronised intermittent mandatory ventilation

synchronised intermittent mandatory ventilation provides a set number

of ventilator- controlled breaths and provides support to any spontaneous

breaths the patient takes in addition. this is to allow for better patient–

ventilator synchronisation.

Oxygenation

the ideal FiO is not known. the effects of GA (supine position, d FrC, i

2

dead space) make oxygenation less efficient, and many patients will become

desaturated below an FiO of 30%.

2

• Keeping FiO low while providing adequate saO may minimise the

2 2

risk of O toxicity, coronary/ cerebral vasoconstriction and absorption

2

atelectasis.

• high FiO may be needed in severely anaemic patients or during

2

massive haemorrhage or other emergencies (see % pp. 1070–2).

• Oxygenation can be improved by i FiO or i mean inspiratory

2

pressure, or both. the mean inspiratory pressure may be i by i

inspiratory time, i inspiratory pressure or i peep.

Clearance of carbon dioxide

CO

2

clearance is proportional to minute ventilation (V

T

× rr). Most pa-

tients can tolerate a modest i etCO without coming to harm, but in some

2

circumstances (e.g. neurosurgery), tight control of CO is needed.

2

Lung- protective ventilation

Considered the standard of care for mechanical ventilation as it has been

demonstrated to reduce postoperative pulmonary complications.1 Aims

include:

• V 6– 8mL/ kg (iBW, not actual body weight)

T

• individualised peep (usually ≥5cmhO), with or without recruitment

2

manoeuvres

• Airway plateau pressures <30cmhO.

2

Positive end- expiratory pressure

peep is the airway pressure above atmospheric pressure at end-e xpiration.

it is usually set between 5 and 20cmhO.

2

• peep is important as it provides pressure to splint open alveoli during

expiration. this improves oxygenation, minimises alveolar collapse

and minimises trauma from collapse and re- expansion of alveoli during

mechanical ventilation.

• Methods to titrate peep include titrating up or down to find the best

compliance or best gas exchange, or titrating peep to oesophageal

pressure with oesophageal manometry.

## 頁面 375

354

354 ChApter 14 Getting started

• higher peep may be required if the patient is in a head-d own position

or obese or during laparoscopic surgery.

• Lower peep may be required in obstructive lung disease to minimise gas

trapping and hyperinflation, or in life- threatening hypotension or states

of low preload.

Inspiratory:expiratory (I:E) ratio and flow rates

By default, the i:e ratio is set to 1:2.

• higher i:e ratios (e.g. 1:4 or higher), and thus shorter inspiratory time,

provide more time for exhalation, so minimise gas trapping, at the cost

of i inspiratory flow rate and i peak airway pressure.

• Lower i:e ratios (e.g. 1:1 or 1:1.5) provide better oxygenation and more

time for alveoli to participate in gas exchange. Beware of gas trapping or

breath- stacking due to inadequate exhalation.

References

1 Miskovic A, Lumb AB (2017). postoperative pulmonary complications. Br J Anaesth, 118, 317– 34.

## 頁面 376

AirWAY eqUipMent 355

Airway equipment

For paediatric airway equipment, see % pp. 908–10.

Endotracheal tube

the ett remains the gold standard for securing and protecting the airway.

it is usually made of polyvinyl chloride, which is clear. silicone tubes are

softer to reduce trauma, but opaque. the size of the tube refers to its in-

ternal diameter in mm.

• the proximal end has a standard 15mm connector. the tube has

markings for length. the distal end has a bevelled tip assisting passage

through the vocal cords, and often a Murphy eye to reduce the

likelihood of obstruction against the wall of the airway. etts should

have a radio- opaque insert for visualisation on X- ray.

• the cuff is normally the low-p ressure, high- volume type. Cuff pressure

can be measured via the pilot balloon and should be 20–3 0cmhO. Very

2

small- diameter tubes (e.g. for neonatal use) usually have no cuff (see %

pp. 922–4). there are many variations on the basic ett design.

Ring, Adair and Elwyn (RAE) tubes

these are preformed tubes, designed to pass downward over the chin

(oral) or upward over the forehead (nasal), and hence obstruct the surgical

field as little as possible. they can be difficult to pass over a bougie, and the

position of the bend varies by manufacturer.

nasal tubes tend to be made of silicone to reduce trauma.

Reinforced tubes

these have a metallic coil in the wall of the tube which reduces kinking.

Laser- proof tubes

these are resistant to laser and used for surgery involving laser in the oro-

pharynx. they may have two cuffs in case one is punctured by the laser (see

% pp. 478–9).

Microlaryngeal tubes

these have a smaller outer diameter for the same inner diameter and are

longer. Used for laryngeal surgery.

Neural integrity monitor

enable monitoring of laryngeal nerve function via eMG and attached

electrodes.

Double- lumen tubes (DLTs)

there are two tubes, within one outer casing, which can be ventilated

together or independently. these tubes allow lung isolation for thoracic

surgery. the sizing and shaping of DLts are specific to this tube (see %

pp. 535–7).

Laryngectomy and tracheostomy tubes

short, kink- resistant, J-s haped tubes for placement into a tracheostomy.

Supraglottic airways

since the introduction of the classic LMA in the late 1980s, there has been

considerable modification and refinement of the basic design, leading to a

wide range of devices becoming available.

the sGA (also referred to as supraglottic airway device (sAD)) consists

of a flexible tube ending in a soft (usually inflatable) cuff designed to form

## 頁面 377

356

356 ChApter 14 Getting started

a seal around the larynx without entering it. sGAs are popular due to ease

of placement and avoid many of the drawbacks of intubation, e.g. d sym-

pathetic stimulation, d sore throat, d trauma to teeth and airway struc-

tures, d bronchospasm, d coughing on emergence. With a reasonable seal,

sGAs are suitable for mechanical ventilation. they do not provide protec-

tion from laryngospasm or aspiration. newer designs incorporate a gastric

channel to d risk of aspiration.

First- generation SGA

One airway tube with the laryngeal mask cuff at the end (Fig. 14.3).

Common variants of the classic LMA include:

• Flexible LMA: longer and narrower, wire- reinforced tube to prevent

kinking, allowing movement away from surgical field

• Intubating LMA (Fastrach®): designed to allow blind intubation of the

trachea by passing a Fastrach® ett through the airway channel. this

device is rigid and has a preformed 90° curve.

Fig. 14.3 A #4 Ultimate™ laryngeal mask, an example of a 1st- generation

sGA. Courtesy Aidan O’Donnell.

Second- generation SGA

these have design features that are intended to reduce the risk of pul-

monary aspiration of gastric contents, such as a gastric channel from the

tip of the cuff up to the proximal end. some also incorporate a rigid airway

channel, or bite- block. they may permit blind or fibreoptic intubation via

the airway channel. Common examples include proseal® LMA often used

for ippV or psV, and i- gel® which has a gel- filled laryngeal cuff which requires

no inflation. Often used in eD and prehospital care. (see Fig. 14.4.)

‘Third- generation’ SGA

this term has appeared in commercial literature for some products. it cur-

rently has no uniform definition in published literature.

## 頁面 378

AirWAY eqUipMent 357

Fig. 14.4 A #4 Auragain™, an example of a 2nd- generation sGA. Courtesy Aidan

O’Donnell.

Other airway adjuncts

Oropharyngeal airways (OPAs) (e.g. Guedel) are tubes made of rigid

plastic that follow the curvature of the palate and open the upper airway by

holding the tongue away from the posterior pharyngeal wall. Flanges on the

external end limit the depth of insertion and should rest on the teeth/l ips.

they are colour- coded to help rapidly identify the size and have a standard-

ised sizing from 000 to 6. inappropriately sized OpAs may worsen obstruc-

tion. not tolerated in awake patients.

Nasopharyngeal airways are made of soft tubing (sized by internal diameter

(iD) in mm) designed to prevent occlusion of the pharynx by the soft palate.

Better tolerated in awake patients than OpAs. to reduce the risk of epi-

staxis, lubricate well and consider topical vasoconstrictor application prior

to gentle insertion following the floor of the nasal cavity.

Laryngoscopes

Direct laryngoscopes

Designed to provide line of sight to the glottis for intubation. the Macintosh

blade is the most popular design, curved longitudinally with a flange to

sweep the tongue out of the way, and a blunt tip designed to engage the

vallecula and lift the epiglottis forward, exposing the glottis. the handle con-

tains batteries and a light source. Other direct laryngoscopes include:

• Straight blades. the tip of the straight blade is designed to lift the

epiglottis, which is especially suitable for intubating children.

• McCoy blade. A variant of the Macintosh blade with a manual hinge

which allows the tip of the blade to further elevate the epiglottis and

improve the view.

Videolaryngoscopes (VLs)

Advantages include a better view, which can be seen by assistants, less ex-

tension of the neck and less trauma to the mouth. (see Fig. 14.5.) there

are a variety of systems available from different manufacturers. they can be

classified by the design of the blades.

## 頁面 379

358

358 ChApter 14 Getting started

Fig. 14.5 A McGrath™ VL. Courtesy Aidan O’Donnell.

• Macintosh blades, e.g. C- MAC®, McGrath®, Glidescope®

• Hyperangulated blades— permit visualisation of the larynx without

alignment of the oropharyngeal and laryngeal axes. examples include

the D- blade for C- MAC® and X- blade for McGrath®. A stylet or bougie

is required to direct the ett into the larynx

• Blades with ETT-g uiding channels, e.g. pentax Airway scope® or King

Vision®.

Endotracheal tube introducers

Intubating stylet

Made of malleable metal. it is inserted into an ett to preform it to a de-

sired shape or curvature prior to intubation.

Intubating bougie

A flexible, long plastic device with an angled tip used to facilitate intubation

of an anterior larynx. the ett is then railroaded over the bougie. Modern

variants are hollow to permit a degree of oxygenation.

Airway exchange catheter

Designed to be passed down an ett and left in the airway as the ett is re-

moved, and to act as a guide for a replacement ett if required. it is hollow

to permit oxygenation.

## 頁面 380

LOnG-terM VenOUs ACCess 359

Long- term venous access

Long- term venous access is a term used to describe venous cannulae, both

central and peripheral, that can remain in situ for protracted periods of time

(table 14.2). patients can be discharged with some types in situ, facilitating

early discharge and community care. As experts in vascular access, place-

ment of these lines often falls to anaesthetists or radiologists. Common

indications include cancer chemotherapy, long- term antibiotics, total par-

enteral nutrition or repeated transfusion/v enesection. Long-t erm venous

catheters avoid the risks and costs of repeated short-t erm access such as

peripheral cannulation.

Choice of device

requires consideration of indication, duration of therapy, risk of contamin-

ation of catheter, anatomical idiosyncracies and risk from sclerosant drugs.

the Michigan Appropriateness Guide for intravenous Catheters (MAGiC)

provides an evidence-b ased algorithmic approach that can assist clinicians in

choosing the best device for their patient.

Midline catheters

Midline catheters are 10– 20cm soft catheters inserted via the antecubital

fossa, with the tip of the device situated in the upper 3rd of the basilic

or cephalic vein, and short of the great vessels. Although not long- term

venous access, midline catheters may be useful for short to medium term

access (e.g. 1–4 w) for drugs that are safe to infuse into peripheral veins

(e.g. antibiotics).

Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC)

A piCC is typically inserted in the upper limb via the basilic or brachial

vein, proximal to the cubital fossa (the cephalic vein is often avoided due to

its tortuous course as it joins the axillary vein). the advantages of piCCs

are their safer insertion and convenient position. Disadvantages include risk

of thrombosis, infection, occlusion, malposition and rarely arrhythmia or

damage to great vessels or pericardial tamponade. some can be used for

venous blood sampling; others cannot and will reduce the life of the cath-

eter. if in doubt, check.

Table 14.2 service life of various intravenous access devices

Device Normal duration

peripheral cannula 48– 72h

Midline catheter 14– 28d

non- cuffed, non- tunnelled CVC 5– 14d

tunnelled, non- cuffed CVC 5– 21d

piCC several months

tunnelled, cuffed CVC (hickman line) Months/ years

subcutaneous port catheter Months/ years

CVC, central venous catheter; piCC, peripherally inserted central catheter.

## 頁面 381

360

360 ChApter 14 Getting started

Tunnelled, cuffed CVCs

tunnelled catheters (e.g. hickman™, Broviac™, cuffed Groshong™) reduce

the risk of the catheter becoming infected. infection risk is reduced by the

tunnel itself and by a subcutaneous Dacron cuff which anchors the catheter

and induces surrounding fibrosis which acts as a barrier to bacteria. it takes

3w for fibrous adhesions to develop, and hence they should not be inserted

for shorter- term use.

• Catheters are usually inserted into the subclavian or internal jugular

vein, with the right side being favoured as it provides a shorter and

simpler route to the vena cava.

• Broviac™ catheters have a smaller lumen than Hickman™ catheters,

but both have open venous ends. Groshong™ lines have a valve on

the venous end which prevents back bleeding and air embolism but

prevents the catheter from being cut down in size prior to insertion.

syringes <10mL should not be used on tunnelled catheters, as high

pressure may damage the catheter tubing.

Port catheters

port catheters are used for prolonged periods of intermittent therapy, e.g.

chemotherapy. the catheter has a silicone entry port that is located under

the skin, usually on the chest, abdomen or arm. the sC location results in

much lower infection rates than tunnelled catheters, and enables bathing/

immersion.

Accessing the port is gained by a specific ‘non-c oring’ needle pushed through

the silicone membrane to the reservoir below. initial access to the port causes

discomfort, and topical LA cream can be applied 30min before. there is a

distinct ‘clunk’ as the needle hits the back wall of the port after penetrating

the membrane. the needle may be left in situ if repeated access is required.

Practical advice

Multidisciplinary discussion prior to insertion of long-t erm venous access

is needed for patients with chronic kidney disease who may require future

dialysis, as it is imperative to preserve peripheral and central veins.

the catheter tip should be positioned in the lower sVC or the cavoatrial

junction (up to two vertebral spaces below the carina on CXr). position

is often confirmed or facilitated by fluoroscopy at the time of placement,

but this can move over time. traditionally, optimal tip position has been

regarded as at the level of the carina on CXr (corresponding to the upper

border of the pericardium, to minimise the risk of cardiac tamponade). the

catheter should run in the long axis of the vein, i.e. not abutting the vein at

an acute angle. this is important as catheter position may change with res-

piration, body position or upper limb movement.

placement of the tip in large- diameter, high- flow vessels reduces the risk

of thrombosis, migration with a risk of extravasation and sclerosis of veins.

Further reading

Bodenham A, Babu s, Bennett J, et al. (2016). safe vascular access 2016. Anaesthesia, 71, 573– 85.

Chopra V, Flanders sA, saint s, et al. (2015). the Michigan Appropriateness Guide for intravenous

Catheters (MAGiC): results from a multispecialty panel using the rAnD/ UCLA Appropriateness

Method. Ann Intern Med, 163(6 suppl), s1– 40.

hudman L, Bodenham Ar (2013). practical aspects of long- term venous access. Contin Educ Anaesth

Crit Care Pain, 13, 6– 11.

Galloway s, Bodenham Ar (2003). safe removal of long-t erm cuffed hickman-t ype catheters. Hosp

Med, 64, 20– 3.

