# Chapter 15: Airway assessment and management

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 382-425*

---

## 頁面 382

Chapter 15 336611

Airway assessment and

management

Jules Cranshaw, Emira Kursumovic and Tim Cook

Airway terminology 362

Airway assessment 363

Unanticipated difficult airway in adults 368

Intubating critically ill patients 373

Equipment and techniques for management of difficult

intubation 379

Emergency front of neck airway 381

Management of the obstructed airway 384

Rapid sequence induction 388

Inhalational induction 391

Awake tracheal intubation 393

Apnoeic oxygenation 397

Extubation after difficult intubation 399

Airborne respiratory viruses 403

This chapter copyright © Tim Cook, Julius Cranshaw and Emira Kursumovic

## 頁面 383

362

362 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Airway terminology

There is an increasing focus on standardising airway nomenclature for safer

and more effective communication. All who manage the airway should use,

as far as possible, the same terminology. Some terms are archaic and can

be simplified. Latin or ancient Greek should not be needed! The following

terms are used in this chapter:

• Flexible optical bronchoscope (FOB) in preference to fibreoptic

bronchoscope. The abbreviation is retained, but this better reflects

modern equipment which does not contain fibres.

• Awake tracheal intubation (ATI) in preference to awake fibreoptic

intubation (AFOI). Modern ATI may be performed with many

instruments, including videolaryngoscopes. Few are now fibreoptic.

• Cannot intubate, cannot oxygenate (CICO) in preference to ‘cannot

intubate, cannot ventilate’, ‘total airway failure’ or other similar

descriptors. Safe communication requires all the words are spoken.

‘CICO’ may be used in writing, but in speech, different pronunciations

(khy- kho, si- co, psycho, etc.) and incomprehension hinder a time-c ritical

message.

• Cricoid force in preference to cricoid pressure. This is applied in units

of force (N or kg) and is correctly described as such.

• Front of neck airway (FONA) and in an emergency, eFONA, in

preference to front of neck access, emergency surgical airway,

infraglottic access, etc.

• Supraglottic airway (SGA) in preference to supraglottic airway

device (SAD).

• Tracheal tube (TT) in preference to endotracheal tube (ETT).

SGAs

For basic information on adult and paediatric airway equipment, see

% pp. 355-8; % pp. 908-10.

The division between first- and second- generation SGAs is pragmatic with

first- generation devices being ‘simple airway tubes’, including the ‘classic

LMA’ and ‘flexible LMA’. Second- generation devices are those with design

features intended to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric con-

tents. These include the ‘LMA proSeal™’, ‘LMA Supreme™’ and ‘i- gel®’.

Further reading

Chrimes N, Cook TM (2017). Critical airways, critical language. Br J Anaesth, 118, 649– 54.

## 頁面 384

AIRwAy ASSESSMENT 363

Airway assessment

The difficult airway is the most important cause of anaesthesia-r elated

morbidity and mortality. Around 30% of deaths attributable to anaesthesia

are associated with problematic airway management. Some catastrophes

are due to suboptimal management in unforeseen circumstances. Others

are due to poor planning in patients with known or predictable difficul-

ties. history, examination and investigations must detect risks to airway

maintenance, ventilation and oxygenation, not just difficult laryngoscopy.

Assessment must inform an airway ‘strategy’ that anticipates and avoids

predicted difficulties, or mitigates adverse effects.

• Beware multiple predictors of difficulty (an indication of high risk).

• Difficulty or failure with one airway management technique is associated

with difficulty and failure with other techniques.

• Intubation is difficult in 71:50 cases (71:10 in ICU) and impossible in

71:200– 1500, depending on setting. Beware risk factors for rapid

hypoxaemia (pregnancy, obesity, infants, existing hypoxaemia). These

mandate great care planning intubation and ventilation strategies (e.g.

preoxygenation, peroxygenation, high- pressure airway seal and pEEp).

• Be familiar with your rescue devices: SGAs, VLs, intubation aids and

eFONAs.

Predictors of difficult airway management

History

Question the patient and check health care records, anaesthetic charts,

alerts and databases for previous airway difficulties, including:

• Anaesthesia- associated dental damage or severe sore throat

• Associated syndromes (e.g. Down, Klippel–F eil, craniofacial)

• Acquired difficulties (e.g. pregnancy, obesity, diabetes, RA, ankylosing

spondylitis, acromegaly, Still’s disease, snoring, OSA)

• Iatrogenic problems (e.g. C- spine fusion, oral/ pharyngeal radiotherapy,

laryngeal/ tracheal/ temporomandibular joint (TMJ) surgery).

Examination

• Anatomical impediments (e.g. small mouth, receding chin, high arched

palate, large tongue, bull neck, obesity, large breasts).

• Acquired problems (e.g. head/ neck burns, goitre, tumour, haematoma,

infection, abscess, restrictive scars). Reduced mouth opening and

temporomandibular advancement (e.g. dental abscess, quinsy, TMJ

surgery, post- radiotherapy).

• poor C- spine movement, especially upper extension.

• poor dentition (e.g. anterior gaps, sharp/ loose/ protruding/ inward/

awkward teeth).

• Orthopaedic/ neurosurgical/ orthodontic equipment (e.g. neck collar,

halo traction, external fixator, stereotactic locator, dental wiring).

• If using the nasal route for FOB, check patency of nasal passages.

• Facial hair may hide adverse anatomical predictors.

• Some hairstyles cause difficult intubation.

## 頁面 385

364

364 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Radiology

• Check imaging (including CXR) for potentially difficult anatomy. A

recent, focused CT/ MRI will give more valuable information.

• Check C-s pine X- rays. Occipito- atlanto- axial disease is more predictive

of difficult direct laryngoscopy than disease below C2.

• Loss of cervical disc space predicts difficult intubation.

• Flexion/ extension or dynamic C- spine studies can confirm instability.

plain X- rays are inadequate predictors of cervical stability.

Predictors of difficult mask ventilation

• Mask ventilation is difficult in 71– 3% of cases; impossible in 71:600.

• Age >60yr, ♂ sex, full beard, BMI >35kg/ m2, previous difficult tracheal

intubation, snoring, OSA, absence of teeth, thyromental distance <6cm,

modified Mallampati classes 3 and 4 (Fig. 15.1), facial abnormalities, neck

radiotherapy, DIFFMASK score ≥5.1

• The DIFFMASK score uses ten predictors of difficult mask ventilation

and ranges 0– 18. Scores 6–1 0 merit detailed further assessment; higher

scores predict risk.

Predictors of difficult SGA insertion and ventilation

• First- time SGA insertion and ventilation fails in >5% of attempts.

• Difficult SGA placement is associated with: narrow gape (insertion

may be impossible); intraoral/ pharyngeal masses (e.g. lingual tonsils);

obesity; and poor dentition.

• Second- generation SGAs are more likely to succeed at first insertion.

Some can aid intubation. higher laryngeal seal pressures (726–

30cmhO vs 715– 20cmhO) may enable ventilation of patients with

2 2

low chest compliance and use of pEEp. with higher oesophageal seal

pressures and a drain port, they may reduce aspiration risk.

Predictors of difficult direct laryngoscopy

• Direct laryngoscopy needs a line of sight from upper teeth to glottis. It

entails mouth opening, extension of upper C- spine and displacing the

mandibular arch tissues.

• predictive tests check one or more of these capabilities, but direct

laryngeal view grade (Fig. 15.2) correlates modestly with difficult

intubation. Most failures occur with grade 2 or 3. Functional grades

have therefore been proposed (Fig. 15.3).

• problems with predictive tests include frequent false positives (a

smaller number are actually difficult) and negatives (most difficulties are

unpredicted). Combining tests exacerbates these problems.

Interincisor gap (II gap)

The distance between the incisors (or alveolar margins) with the mouth

open maximally:

• <3cm predicts difficulty.

• <2.5cm— SGA insertion will also be difficult.

Mandibular protrusion

• Class A: can protrude lower incisors anterior to upper incisors.

• Class B: can protrude lower incisors to, but not beyond, upper incisors.

• Class C: cannot protrude lower incisors to upper incisors.

Classes B and C are associated with difficulty.

## 頁面 386

AIRwAy ASSESSMENT 365

Fig. 15.1 Modified Mallampati classes 1, 2, 3 and 4.

Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 4

Fig. 15.2 Cormack and Lehane’s classification of laryngeal view.

Grade 1 Grade 2A Grade 2B Grade 3A Grade 3B Grade 4

Easy Restricted Difficult

Fig. 15.3 Cook’s modified classification of the laryngeal view. Grades 1– 4 refer to

Cormack and Lehane’s classification. In Cook’s classification, ‘easy’ views (glottis visible) require

no adjuncts; ‘restricted’ views (posterior laryngeal structures visible or epiglottis liftable) require

a bougie; ‘difficult’ views (epiglottis not liftable or not visible) require advanced techniques to

intubate.

Upper lip bite test

The patient attempts to bite as far up their upper lip as they can:

• Class I: lower incisors bite upper lip, upper lip mucosa invisible

• Class II: upper lip mucosa partially visible

• Class III: the lower incisors fail to bite the upper lip.

Class III is a strong predictor of difficult laryngoscopy.2

Mallampati test (with Samsoon and Young’s modification)

(See Fig. 15.1.)

position yourself opposite the patient. Examine the oropharynx while

the patient opens his/ her mouth maximally, protruding the tongue without

phonating.

## 頁面 387

366

366 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

• Class 1: faucial pillars, soft palate and uvula visible

• Class 2: faucial pillars and soft palate visible— uvula tip masked by base

of tongue

• Class 3: only soft palate visible.

• Class 4: soft palate not visible.

Class 3 and 4 views (no posterior pharyngeal wall view) are associated with

difficult laryngoscopy. This test is prone to interobserver variation. Used

alone, it correctly predicts about 50% of difficult laryngoscopies and has a

false positive rate of >95%.

Extension of the upper cervical spine

when limited, the risk of difficult direct laryngoscopy is i. Movement may

be assessed by:

• Flexing the head on the neck, immobilising the lower C-s pine with one

hand on the neck, then fully extending the head. placing a pointer on the

vertex or forehead allows estimation of the angle of movement.

• placing one finger on the patient’s chin and one finger on the occipital

protuberance, and extending the head maximally.

with normal C- spine mobility, the finger on the chin is higher than the

one on the occiput. Level fingers indicate moderate limitation. If the finger

on the chin remains lower than the one on the occiput, there is severe

limitation.

Thyromental distance (Patil test)

Tip of thyroid cartilage to tip of mandible, neck fully extended:

• Normal >7cm; <6cm predicts 775% of difficult laryngoscopies.

• Combined patil and Mallampati tests (<7 cm and classes 3– 4) increase

the specificity (97%) but decrease the sensitivity (81%).

Sternomental distance (Savva test)

Sternal notch to tip of mandible, neck fully extended, mouth closed:

<12.5cm associated with difficulty (positive predictive value 82%).

Wilson score

• Five factors: weight, upper C- spine mobility, jaw movement, receding

mandible and protruding upper teeth. Factors are scored, some

objectively and some subjectively, from broadly normal to severely

abnormal, and allocated 0, 1 or 2 points.

• A total score of ≥2 predicts 75% of difficult intubations; 12% false

positives.

MACOCHA score3

• Identifies critically ill patients at risk of difficult intubation.

• The name is an aide memoire for its variables.

• weighted variables: Mallampati 3 or 4 (scores 5); Apnoea/O SA (scores 2);

reduced C- spine mobility (this and all others score 1); Mouth Opening

<3cm; Coma; severe Hypoxaemia; non-A naesthetist intubator.

• Range 0– 12 (score >2 predicts difficult intubation).

Predictors of difficult videolaryngoscopy

• Narrow and rigid oro- and laryngopharynx (e.g. tumour, trauma,

cervical pathology, radiotherapy change), fixed neck flexion.

• A narrow gape relative to a wide VL makes insertion difficult or

impossible.

## 頁面 388

AIRwAy ASSESSMENT 367

Predictors of difficult paediatric mask ventilation and

intubation

• Difficult mask ventilation has a similar prevalence to that in adults but

is i in the very young. Insert a ‘shoulder roll’ for children <2y. Beware

laryngospasm as a cause of difficult mask ventilation.

• Difficult intubation is associated with weight <10kg, short thyromental

distance (micrognathia) and >2 direct laryngoscopy attempts before an

indirect technique.

Predictors of difficult front of neck airway

• Obesity (i pretracheal tissue makes reaching the trachea more difficult),

goitre and other anterior neck masses or vessels, infection/s carring,

tracheal deviation, fixed neck flexion, previous neck radiotherapy,

surgical collar/ external fixator preventing access.

• Inspect a recent CT/ MRI. Ultrasound may be useful.

Predictors of difficult awake tracheal intubation

• In experienced hands, the complication of unplanned removal of an

FOB, VL or TT during ATI is 1–2 %.4

• predictors include: inadequate oxygenation, uncooperative patients,

operator and/ or assistant inexperience, suboptimal environments

(e.g. ED or ICU), airway blood or unmanageable airway secretions,

inadequate topical anaesthesia, oversedation, inability to pass a nasal

tube, ill- fitting adjuncts (e.g. FOB conduits; see % p. 395), very narrow

airway (‘cork- in- bottle’) and larger TT.

Further reading

Roth D, pace NL, Lee A, et al. (2019). Bedside tests for predicting difficult airways: an abridged

Cochrane diagnostic test accuracy systematic review. Anaesthesia, 74, 915– 28.

Kheterpal S, healy D, Aziz MF, et al.; Multicenter perioperative Outcomes Group (MpOG)

perioperative Clinical Research Committee (2013). Incidence, predictors, and outcome of difficult

mask ventilation combined with difficult laryngoscopy: a report from the multicenter periopera-

tive outcomes group. Anesthesiology, 119, 1360– 9.

Cook TM, MacDougall- Davis SR (2012). Complications and failure of airway management. Br J

Anaesth, 109 Suppl 1, i68– 85.

Ramachandran SK, Mathis MR, Tremper KK, et al. (2012). predictors and clinical outcomes from

failed Laryngeal Mask Airway Unique™: a study of 15,795 patients. Anesthesiology, 116, 1217– 26.

Kheterpal S, han R, Tremper KK, et al. (2006). Incidence and predictors of difficult and impossible

mask ventilation. Anesthesiology, 105, 885– 91.

Shiga T, wajima Z, Inoue T, et al. (2005). predicting difficult intubation in apparently normal patients:

a meta- analysis of bedside screening test performance. Anesthesiology, 103, 429– 37.

yentis S (2002). predicting difficult intubation—w orthwhile exercise or pointless ritual? Anaesthesia,

57, 105– 9.

Cook TM (2000). A new practical classification of laryngeal view. Anaesthesia, 55, 274– 9.

Langeron O, Masso E, huraux C, et al. (2000). prediction of difficult mask ventilation. Anesthesiology,

92, 1229– 36.

Lundstrom L, Rosenstock C, wetterslev J, et al. (2019). The DIFFMASK score for predicting diffic ult

facemask ventilation: a cohort study of 46,804 patients. Anaesthesia, 74, 1267–76.

Detsky ME, Jivraj N, Adhikari NK, et al. (2019). will this patient be difficult to intubate?: the rat ional

clinical examination systematic review [published correction appears in JAMA (2020) 323, 1194].

JAMA, 321, 493–503. doi:10.1001/ jama.2018.21413

## 頁面 389

368

368 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Unanticipated difficult airway in adults

• Adverse events usually develop from both difficult intubation and

difficult mask ventilation.

• when disasters occur, patients die from failed oxygenation, not failed

intubation.

• Difficult ventilation makes oxygenation harder.

• Call for the ‘difficult airway trolley’ and experienced help early. Avert

detrimental consequences: desaturation, multiple interventions causing

airway trauma and CICO, aspiration and awareness.

• Use a ‘strategy’; a pre- agreed sequence of plans that manages failure of

previous attempts.

• preoxygenate to delay desaturation. Give 100% O whenever airway

2

problems are anticipated or develop.

• Confirm tracheal intubation with capnography and examination.

• Attend regular training in creating FONAs.

Unanticipated difficult tracheal intubation

Consider this four- step strategy (Fig. 15.4) to maintain oxygenation.

Plan A: mask ventilation and tracheal intubation

• Optimise the 1st laryngoscopy. Use the ‘sniffing position’. with obesity,

use ‘ramping’ 20– 25°. preoxygenate. Target ETO >85%. Ensure

2

complete NMB.

• Use a laryngoscope and blade with which you have training and

experience. Ready a 2nd choice that you are also trained to use.

‘Shared- screen’ VLs aid teamwork.

• A smaller TT provides a better view and easier passage than larger.

Improve the view by optimal external laryngeal manipulation (OELM),

or backward, upward, rightward pressure (BURp) with cricoid force.

• Use a gum elastic bougie (GEB), TT introducer or stylet carefully. If the

view or TT passage is difficult, reduce any cricoid force. have suction

ready. Maintain oxygenation by mask ventilation with O between

2

attempts. Limit attempts (≤3). Allow a more experienced colleague one

attempt. If plan A fails, declare, ‘Failed intubation’.

Plan B: ventilation with an SGA

SGAs rescue the airway in >90% of cases (see % pp. 355–7; % p. 379).

Remove any cricoid force. have suction ready. Limit attempts (≤3).

• In difficulty, try a different insertion technique, size or SGA.

• If oxygenation is successful, ‘stop and think’ about options: wake up;

proceed with the SGA; intubate via the SGA with FOB assistance

(one attempt only); create a tracheostomy or cricothyroidotomy in

controlled circumstances.

• If oxygenation fails, declare, ‘Failed SGA ventilation’.

Plan C: face mask ventilation— a final attempt

• Ensure complete NMB. If you successfully oxygenate, and waking will

sustain this, reverse NMB and wake the patient.

• Beware. Residual anaesthesia, airway trauma and airway or pulmonary

pathology may make waking unfeasible.

• If plan C fails, declare clearly, ‘I cannot intubate and cannot oxygenate.

we need to perform an emergency front of neck airway!’

• hypoxic brain injury and cardiac arrest are imminent.

## 頁面 390

UNANTICIpATED DIFFICULT AIRwAy IN ADULTS 369

Plan A: Facemask ventilation and tracheal

intubation

Optimise head and neck position If in difficulty call for help

Preoxygenate

Adequate neuromuscular blockade Succeed

Confirm tracheal intubation with

Direct/Video Laryngoscopy (maximum

capnography

3 + 1 attempts)

External laryngeal manipulation

Bougie

Remove cricoid force

Maintain oxygenation and anaesthesia

STOP AND THINK

Declare failed intubation

Options (consider risks and

Plan B: Maintaining oxygenation: SGA benefits):

insertion Succeed 1.Wake the patient up

2nd generation device recommended 2.Intubate trachea via the SGA

Change device or size (maximum 3 attempts) 3.Proceed without intubating the

Oxygenate and ventilate trachea

4.Tracheostomy or

Declare failed SGA ventilation cricothyroidotomy

Succeed

Plan C: Facemask ventilation Wake the patient up

If facemask ventilation impossible, paralyse

Final attempt at facemask ventilation Post-operative care and follow up

Use 2 person technique and adjuncts • Formulate immediate airway

Declare CICO management plan

•Monitor for complications

Plan D: Emergency front of neck access •Complete airway alert form

Scalpel cricothyroidotomy • Explain to the patient in person and in

writing

•Send written report to GP and local

database

This flowchart forms part of the DAS Guidelines for unanticipated difficult intubation in

adults 2015 and should be used in conjunction with the text.

Fig. 15.4 Unanticipated difficult tracheal intubation. Reproduced from Difficult Airway

Society 2015 guidelines for management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Difficult

Airway Society intubation guidelines working group, BJA, 115(6), 827– 848. doi:10.1093/ bja/

aev371. permission for the use of these algorithms for commercial purposes must be sought

directly from Difficult Airway Society as they hold the copyrights.

Plan D: emergency front of neck airway

• Several techniques are described. Be decisive.

• Based on your training, choose scalpel or cannula cricothyroidotomy.

Familiar kit must be immediately available.

• Continue oxygenation efforts with mask or SGA. Maintain complete

NMB. hyperextend the neck.

• perform a laryngeal handshake: move the upper larynx from side to

side between thumb and index finger; slide the fingers to the thyroid

laminae; stabilize the larynx between middle finger and thumb; use the

index finger to find the cricothyroid membrane. Stabilise the larynx with

one hand.

• For the scalpel cricothyroidotomy technique, see % p. 381 and Fig 15.7.

• For the cannula technique, see % pp. 381–3.

### 表格


| Plan A: Facemask ventilation and tracheal intubation |
| --- |
| Optimise head and neck position Preoxygenate Adequate neuromuscular blockade Direct/Video Laryngoscopy (maximum 3 + 1 attempts) External laryngeal manipulation Bougie Remove cricoid force Maintain oxygenation and anaesthesia |



## 頁面 391

370

370 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Unanticipated difficult face mask ventilation

• The commonest cause is lost upper airway patency. Rarer causes are

listed below.

• An effective seal requires good mask fit (consider leaving well-fi xed

dentures), good technique and assistance. Ensure complete NMB.

• Reposition the patient to improve ventilation, not laryngoscopy.

• Insert a correctly sized oropharyngeal airway (OpA). Use a ‘VE’

grip, thumbs caudad on each side of the mask while simultaneously

performing a chin lift and jaw thrust with your fingers. Ask an assistant

to hold the O ‘flush’ button if needed and to attempt gentle ventilation

2

(two- person technique). Another assistant may provide more effective

jaw thrust.

• Reduce any cricoid force. have suction ready.

• Ventilation via an SGA or intubation usually forms part of a strategy for

unanticipated difficult mask ventilation.

• Consider a nasal airway, but beware bleeding.

Other causes of difficult face mask ventilation

• Anaesthetic circuit problems (e.g. switch, blockage, disconnection,

leak). Check entire circuit, mask and catheter mount before induction.

Change to a self- inflating bag and new mask if doubt remains.

• Laryngospasm (see below; % p. 1073).

• Bronchospasm (see % pp. 1078–1079). Beware in asthma, anaphylaxis

and smokers.

• Foreign body (e.g. throat pack, object from anaesthetic circuit, teeth,

denture, blood clot, mucus plug). Exclude by inspection and FOB.

• Laryngeal pathology (rare). eFONA, including tracheostomy, may be

lifesaving.

• Lower airway pathology (rare, e.g. mediastinal masses). Tracheal

intubation or rigid bronchoscopy may be lifesaving.

Laryngospasm in adults

Laryngospasm can be rapidly fatal. Consider in airway obstruction without

obvious supraglottic cause. Sometimes preceded by stridor or a character-

istic ‘crowing’ noise, it may be instant, complete and silent.

• Inspect the airway. Use suction to remove all contaminants.

• Obtain a tight mask seal and patent upper airway (as above). Close

the expiratory valve. Apply CpAp with 100% O. Use an assistant to

2

squeeze the bag and to attempt gentle manual ventilation.

• ‘Forcible’ jaw thrust or bilateral anterior pressure on the mandibular

rami just in front of the mastoid process (Larson’s point) may ‘break’

laryngospasm by a combination of stimulation and airway opening.

• Deepening anaesthesia with a small dose of propofol (20–5 0mg) may

relax laryngospasm.

• If desaturation begins, consider a small dose of IV suxamethonium (0.1–

0.5mg/ kg actual body weight). If laryngospasm is severe, intubate using

IV 1–1 .5mg/ kg (actual body weight, maximum 150mg).

• If there is no venous access, consider submental intralingual

suxamethonium 3mg/ kg (actual body weight, maximum 150mg) with

massage; or IM in the thigh 4mg/ kg (actual body weight, maximum

150mg) with massage.

• Before waking, consider a change in airway management (e.g. exchange

a TT for an SGA) to try to reduce the risk of recurrence.

## 頁面 392

UNANTICIpATED DIFFICULT AIRwAy IN ADULTS 371

Diagnosing oesophageal intubation

• Always suspect oesophageal intubation after difficult intubation. patients

continue to die of this avoidable complication.

• Do not induce anaesthesia without a working waveform capnograph.

• Tracheal intubation and ventilation produce a sustained waveform

capnograph trace.

• Even after cardiac arrest, a small waveform trace will be seen, with or

without chest compressions.

• Difficult mask ventilation can push expired CO into the oesophagus

2

and stomach. After oesophageal intubation, this CO may be detected

2

but will rapidly diminish to zero with ventilation.

• Rarely, complete obstruction (circuit, tube, airway or severe

bronchospasm) prevents ventilation, and no trace can be produced.

• Otherwise, a flat trace indicates no lung ventilation; oesophageal

intubation should be assumed and excluded—‘ No trace equals wrong

place’.

• Clinical signs may be used but are unreliable, as you tend to see and

hear what you expect and want.

• If in doubt, remove the TT. Oxygenate.

Paediatric considerations

(For management of paediatric airway, see % pp. 921–4.)

• Consider specific paediatric guidelines.

• hypoxaemia is rapid in neonates, infants and small children if ventilation

is inadequate. Maintain oxygenation and consider options.

• Each direct laryngoscopy, after the first, is associated with complications

(e.g. desaturation <85% and cardiovascular instability).

• Minimise the number of direct laryngoscopic attempts. Consider VL or

FOB- assisted intubation possibly via an SGA.

• SGA insertion failure is lower in older children than in adults, but failure

is associated with more cardiorespiratory complications.

• Reflex responses to airway manipulation or suxamethonium, aggravated

by hypoxaemia, may cause bradycardia and cardiac arrest.

Paediatric laryngospasm

(See % p. 921 for additional information.)

• Laryngospasm is more common than in adults and hypoxaemia

develops faster. Decision- making and action must be quicker.

• Consider deepening anaesthesia with propofol 0.5mg/k g; a small dose

of IV suxamethonium (0.1– 0.5mg/ kg); or, if laryngospasm is severe,

intubate with IV suxamethonium 1mg/k g (maximum 150mg) (2mg/ kg

in infants). Intubation without NMB may be attempted but is not always

possible. If there is no IV access, submental intralingual suxamethonium

3mg/ kg (maximum 150mg) with massage will relax the larynx in 72min.

Alternatively, give IM suxamethonium 4mg/ kg in the thigh (maximum

150mg) with massage.

• Beware stomach inflation during ventilation attempts.

• This can trigger vagal reflexes and regurgitation, and splint the

diaphragm.

• Consider early gastric drainage.

## 頁面 393

372

372 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Obstetric considerations

(For failed intubation in obstetric anaesthesia, see % p. 864.)

• The incidence of failed intubation is high (71:300) due to patient,

surgical and environmental factors.

• Consider obstetric difficult airway guidelines. Most advocate ≤2

intubation attempts, with one more reserved for an experienced

practitioner.

• high-fl ow nasal oxygen (hFNO) delays desaturation after induction of

GA (see also % p. 397).

Follow- up of patients with difficult airways

• Document difficulties and successful and unsuccessful approaches in

health care records.

• Make sure these are easily accessible and prominent (e.g. in ‘Alert’

sections). Complete an ‘airway alert’ form for local and national (e.g.

DAS) databases.

• Advise patients that they may register with independent medical alert

providers. warn about delayed symptoms of airway trauma and how to

seek help.

## 頁面 394

INTUBATING CRITICALLy ILL pATIENTS 373

Intubating critically ill patients

Critically ill patients often need emergency intubation in challenging circum-

stances and ‘hostile’ environments. Environmental stress undermines team-

work (human factors). when intubation is difficult, hypoxaemia increases,

but waking the patient may not be lifesaving.

• In the ICU and ED, intubation fails first time in >10% of cases.

Desaturation to <80% occurs in 720%. Difficulties are more likely to be

managed suboptimally. Airway catastrophes in the ICU are more likely

to lead to brain damage and death.5

• prepare for airway difficulty, aspiration, hypotension (systolic Bp

<90mmhg in 730%) and CVS collapse (cardiac arrest in 2%).5

• Optimise oxygenation before, during and after intubation.

• Training and experience with kit are essential.

The ‘Vortex Approach’ vs an ‘Airway Strategy’

The Difficult Airway Society (DAS) and other guidelines provide didactic

strategies to manage unanticipated difficult intubation after inducing GA in

the form of logically prioritised sequences of plans. The ‘Vortex Approach’

to airway crises is unconstrained by this context and removes potentially re-

stricting and complex linearity. It uses a simple visual cognitive aid; a picture

of a vortex with an outer zone where oxygenation is successful; and an inner

zone where the patient is in danger, marked with three equally spaced icons

for face mask ventilation, SGA insertion and tracheal intubation. In crisis, each

technique may be tried in any order. with each device a maximum of three

attempts or one optimal attempt is permitted and might move a patient out

of the vortex or risk tipping them further in towards eFONA. Failure of all

attempts or critical deterioration mandates eFONA. The ‘Vortex Approach’

is currently considered complementary to airway algorithms.

Preparation

• Consider an A, B/ C, D airway management strategy (Fig. 15.5).

• Identify risks of difficult intubation (e.g. MACOChA score; see %

p. 366) and difficulty with rescue techniques.

• If you suspect upper airway pathology and time allows, obtain a

nasendoscopic view of the larynx.

• Identify aspiration risk. Leave an NGT. Stop feed. Aspirate the stomach.

Consider RSI.

• After assessment: modify your plan accordingly.

• Brief your team. Allocate roles (e.g. CVS management). Use checklists

and cognitive aids such as in Fig. 15.6. Know how to access expert

airway help quickly. Be aware of time passing.

• Check your kit. have familiar second-g eneration SGAs, FOB and

eFONA kit immediately available. Apply routine monitoring (at least).

waveform capnography is mandatory.

• perform a laryngeal handshake. Consider marking the trachea and

midline. Use ultrasound if needed and trained. Mark the cricothyroid

membrane in the neck position that cricothyroidotomy will be

performed.

• Be prepared to manage acute adverse CVS changes during and after

intubation (particularly with recruitment manoeuvres).

## 頁面 395

374

374 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Fig. 15.5 Tracheal intubation in critically ill adults. Reproduced from Difficult Airway

Society 2015 guidelines for management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Difficult

Airway Society intubation guidelines working group, BJA, 115(6), 827– 848. doi:10.1093/ bja/

aev371. permission for the use of these algorithms for commercial purposes must be sought

directly from Difficult Airway Society as they hold the copyrights.

## 頁面 396

INTUBATING CRITICALLy ILL pATIENTS 375

ni

noitabutni

tlucffiid

detapicitnanu

fo

tnemeganam

rof

senilediug

5102

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

morf

decudorpeR

.stluda

lli

yllacitirc

rof

tsilkcehc

gnitabutnI

6.51

.giF

laicremmoc

rof

smhtirogla

eseht

fo

esu

eht

rof

noissimrep

.173vea

/ajb

/3901.01:iod

.84

–728

,)6(511

,AJB

,puorg

gnikrow

senilediug

noitabutni

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

.stluda

.sthgirypoc

eht

dloh

yeht

sa

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

morf

yltcerid

thguos

eb

tsum

sesoprup

## 頁面 397

376

376 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Plan A

The goal is timely, atraumatic first-t ime intubation by optimising position,

NMB, laryngoscopy, teamwork and equipment. This is supported by

maximised preoxygenation and peroxygenation. Beware a low paO after

2

preoxygenation predicts hypoxaemia after induction.

Preoxygenation

Consider using:

• Tight- fitting mask, O at 15L/ min with a system enabling some CpAp,

2

e.g. water’s circuit (Mapleson C).

• hFNO at 30– 70L/ min.

• CpAp with 100% O.

2

• Non- invasive ventilation with 100% O.

2

• Nasal cannula O at 5L/ min while the patient is awake and 15L/ min

2

when the patient is induced.

Nasal cannulae can prevent mask seal. If a seal is made, simultaneous

hFNO may cause high airway pressure, as hFNO systems have no pres-

sure relief valve.

• hFNO contraindications include basal skull and facial fractures.

• Running hFNO, a breathing system, e.g. water’s circuit (Mapleson C),

and a ventilator simultaneously requires three near- patient O sources.

2

• Existing CpAp and non- invasive ventilation systems might be left in situ

during induction, but plan when and how to remove masks quickly to

allow laryngoscopy.

Peroxygenation

hFNO or nasal O at 15L/ min should be provided until intubation is

2

successful.

Positioning

Raise the bed head up 20–3 0° to aid oxygenation. Tilting the whole bed

may be safer in known or suspected spinal injury. Start with the ‘sniffing

position’. In obesity, ‘ramp’ the upper body so the external auditory meatus

is level with the sternal notch and the face horizontal.

Induction

• Ketamine may have advantages over other induction agents. Small doses

during preoxygenation may ease cooperation.

• Rapid- acting opioids, such as fentanyl or alfentanil, may aid CVS stability.

• For rapid NMB, rocuronium has advantages over suxamethonium;

fewer contraindications and adverse effects (fasciculations consume

O). Rocuronium 1.2mg/k g achieves intubating conditions as fast as

2

suxamethonium 1mg/ kg.

• If indicated, ask a trained assistant to apply cricoid force—1 0N (1kg) on

induction, i to 30N (3kg) after loss of consciousness. Cricoid force may

reduce aspiration and stomach inflation but, especially if excessive, can

impede face mask ventilation, laryngoscopy and passage of the TT. VL

may aid appropriate cricoid force. Remove cricoid force if vomiting and

when inserting an SGA.

• while waiting for effective NMB, sustain oxygenation by ventilation.

Ventilation may also control paCO. This might be important in raised

2

ICp, pregnancy, pulmonary hypertension and acidaemia. Keep airway

pressure low (preferably <20cmhO) to avoid stomach inflation.

2

Reduce cricoid force if ventilation is difficult. have suction ready.

## 頁面 398

INTUBATING CRITICALLy ILL pATIENTS 377

• Use a laryngoscope and blade with which you have gained confidence.

Ready your second choice. Limit intubation attempts to ≤3. Allow an

expert one attempt. Maintain oxygenation between attempts.

• If direct laryngoscopy is your first approach, ready a GEB, introducer or

stylet. Use carefully. Avoid ‘blind’ insertion.

• Consider VL as your first choice if trained. Switch to VL if you have

difficulty. It is likely VL will improve your view, reduce trauma and

increase success. If trained, use a hyperangulated blade with a stylet

when a Macintosh- style blade fails. Use your assistants. VL with a screen

shared by assistants can direct them to improve OELM, BURp and

cricoid force. Blood, secretions and reflux may hamper VL (and direct

laryngoscopy).

• Reduce or release cricoid force if the view or TT passage is

problematic. Be ready with suction.

• where there is difficulty, choose a TT type and size allowing the best

laryngeal view, easy passage and least trauma. TTs with subglottic

suction have larger external diameter. The size and type may not be

optimal for long- term ICU ventilation. however, TT exchange after

stabilisation may be safer than failing with a large TT.

• If plan A fails, declare clearly, ‘Failed intubation!’

• Call for expert help.

• Open and prepare your eFONA kit.

• If plan A succeeds, planned and preset ventilation strategies may re-

establish and improve oxygenation quickly.

Plan B/C for failed intubation

The goal is successful oxygenation (plan B). The ‘high’ seal pressure pro-

vided by a second-generation SGA may enable you to ventilate a low-

compliant chest with pEEp. Aspiration risk is reduced.

• Minimise insertion attempts (≤3).

• If an attempt fails, try a new SGA size, type, insertion technique or

operator.

• One failed optimal attempt might enable you to rule out SGA insertion

as a successful approach.

• Attempt mask ventilation (plan C) between SGA insertion attempts.

Insert a correctly sized OpA. Use a ‘VE’ grip, thumbs caudad on each

side of the mask. Use your fingers to lift the chin. Ask an assistant to

add ‘jaw thrust’. Use a water’s circuit (Mapleson C) to give 100% O

2

with CpAp.

• Minimise mask ventilation attempts (≤3).

• One failed optimal attempt might lead you to abandon mask ventilation

as a successful option.

• Consider a nasal airway, but beware bleeding.

• Allow an expert one attempt at SGA insertion and mask ventilation,

BUT they may choose an immediate eFONA.

• Recognise failure of plans B and C within 1min.

• Clinical deterioration and worsening oxygenation mandate rapid

transition to eFONA.

• Declare clearly, ‘I cannot intubate and cannot oxygenate. we need an

emergency front of neck airway!’ (plan D).

## 頁面 399

378

378 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

• If oxygenation via an SGA or mask ventilation is successful, stop and

think. Consider your plan.

• wait for an expert if stability allows.

• waking may not be an option due to neurological impairment, drug

effects, airway pathology, pulmonary pathology and other critical

illness.

• If oxygenation via an SGA is acceptable, consider FOB-a ssisted

intubation via the SGA. If feasible, make one optimal attempt only.

• If a TT is essential, consider eFONA during stability, especially if

oxygenation is precarious, ventilation is difficult, aspiration is a risk

and FOB- assisted intubation is unlikely or has failed.

• Do not wait for life- threatening hypoxaemia to proceed to eFONA.

Further reading

higgs A, McGrath BA, Goddard C, et al. (2018). Guidelines for the management of tracheal intub-

ation in critically ill adults. Br J Anaesth, 120, 323– 52.

Black AE, Flynn pER, Smith hL, et al. (2015). Development of a guideline for the management of the

unanticipated difficult airway in pediatric practice. Paediatr Anaesth, 25, 346– 62.

Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, et al. (2015). Difficult Airway Society 2015 guidelines for manage-

ment of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Br J Anaesth, 115, 827– 48.

Mushambi MC, Kinsella SM, popat M, et al. (2015). Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association and Difficult

Airway Society guidelines for the management of difficult and failed tracheal intubation in obstet-

rics. Anaesthesia, 70, 1286– 306.

Cook TM, MacDougall- Davis SR. (2012). Complications and failure of airway management. Br J

Anaesth, 109 Suppl 1, i68– 85.

Cook TM, woodall N, harper J, et al; Fourth National Audit project (2011). Major complications of

airway management in the UK: results of the Fourth National Audit project of the Royal College

of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society. part 2: intensive care and emergency depart-

ments. Br J Anaesth, 106, 632– 42.

Nolan Jp, Kelly FE (2011). Airway challenges in critical care. Anaesthesia, 66 (Suppl 2), 81–92.

De Jong A, Molinari N, Terzi N, et al. (2013). Article 1. Early identification of patients at risk for

difficult intubation in the intensive care unit: development and validation of the MACOChA

score in a multicenter cohort study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 187, 832–9. doi:10.1164/

rccm.201210- 1851OC

## 頁面 400

MANAGEMENT OF DIFFICULT INTUBATION 379

Equipment and techniques for

management of difficult intubation

For basic information on adult and paediatric airway equipment, see %

pp. 355–8; % pp. 908–10.

GEBs and tracheal tube introducers

• There are numerous designs. performance varies. Incorrect use risks

airway trauma and perforation. Rigidity increases trauma risk.

• These devices ease intubation with ‘restricted’ glottic views

(laryngoscopy grades 2b and 3a; see % p. 365). ‘Blind’ passage is

discouraged (e.g. in grade 3b or 4 view). It risks airway trauma.

• Keep the device anterior and midline to avoid the piriform fossae and

oesophageal insertion. An assistant may ‘feel’ the device pass through

the larynx. you may feel it ‘bumping’ down tracheal rings. Do not insert

beyond the carina (724– 26cm). Do not deliberately elicit ‘rotation’ or

‘hold- up’ (740cm) by entering the bronchi. This can cause trauma.

• ‘Railroad’ the TT over the device, carefully maintaining the pharyngeal

space with the laryngoscope. Rotation 90° counterclockwise may avoid

a bevel sticking on the larynx. A smaller TT or one with a bullet tip is

easier to ‘railroad’.

Intubation via an SGA

• An SGA can act as a ‘dedicated airway’, enabling oxygenation and

ventilation during intubation via the airway channel.

• FOB increases success to near 100%.6 ‘Blind’ intubation via an SGA is

not recommended due to higher failure and complication rates.

• One technique uses an Aintree Intubation Catheter (AIC) (Cook Critical

Care®) (ID 4.7mm, external diameter 6.3 mm) over an FOB. place

the AIC supracarinally, and then remove the SGA and FOB. A TT (ID

7.0mm) is railroaded over the AIC. This is suitable for a number of SGAs

(e.g. i- gel® and LMA proSeal™). It is less well suited to the LMA Supreme™

or Laryngeal Tubes™ because of their narrow airway lumens.

• The airway channel of some SGAs can accommodate a TT. These allow

intubation and leaving the SGA in situ. Beware. Before attempting to

railroad a TT through an SGA, you must know the TT will fit through

and that its cuff will reach the trachea (e.g. consider LMA Fastrach™

(intubating LMA) or parker Flex- Tip® reinforced TT).

Videolaryngoscopes

• There are various devices. They are not equal. All require training and

experience for safe and effective use.

• VLs provide better laryngeal views than direct laryngoscopes. with skill,

they increase intubation success in difficult airways. Use by unskilled

practitioners in crises is discouraged.

• VLs may become less useful if their ‘eye’ is covered by secretions or

blood but the impact is no greater on a VL than direct laryngoscope.

• VL uses less force than direct laryngoscopy, reducing airway trauma

and facilitating ATI. Some prefer intubating with VL during C-s pine

immobilisation.

There are three main types.

## 頁面 401

380

380 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Bladed videolaryngoscopes

• Include straight and Macintosh style (enabling direct laryngoscopy) and

hyperangulated blades (which do not). May be single use or reusable.

• Blade design may facilitate standard, midline or paramedian insertion

and enable some airway manipulation, but a stylet or bougie may be

essential to intubate.

• These include C- MAC®, GlideScope®, I- view™ and McGrath™.

Conduited videolaryngoscopes

• have a channel to guide a TT into the camera view.

• TT size and type relative to the conduit may affect intubation success.

Avoid relatively small TTs. They may ‘cut the angle’ created by the

channel and point posteriorly.

• These include Airtraq™, pentax AwS®, King Vision™ and Venner A.p.

Advance™.

Optical stylets

• Are preformed rigid or malleable metal guides connecting an imaging

system to an eyepiece or screen.

• A TT is preloaded, manipulated to the glottis and advanced into the

trachea. Stylets require minimal mouth opening but have limited ability

to displace tissues.

• They may be used for ATI or as a ‘light wand’.

• These include Bonfils®, Levitan, Shikani and Trachway®.

Further reading

Cook TM, Kelly FE (2017). A national survey of videolaryngoscopy in the United Kingdom. Br J

Anaesth, 118, 596– 600.

Lewis SR, Butler AR, parker J, et al. (2016). Videolaryngoscopy versus direct laryngoscopy for adult

patients requiring tracheal intubation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 11, CD011136.

Zaouter C, Calderon J, hemmerling TM (2015). Videolaryngoscopy as a new standard of care. Br

J Anaesth, 114, 181– 3.

Behringer EC, Kristensen MS (2011). Evidence for benefit vs novelty in new intubation equipment.

Anaesthesia, 66 Suppl 2, 57– 64.

Dhara SS (2009). Retrograde tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia, 64, 1094– 104.

waters DJ (1963). Guided blind endotracheal intubation. Anaesthesia, 18, 158– 62.

## 頁面 402

EMERGENCy FRONT OF NECK AIRwAy 381

Emergency front of neck airway

Rescue techniques for ‘cannot intubate, cannot oxygenate’

• eFONA can prevent hypoxic brain damage and death in CICO

situations if used rapidly and effectively before critical desaturation.

• Anticipation and preparation are key.

• eFONA relies on palpable landmarks. Identifying these takes practice.

when eFONA may be needed, if the situation allows, the landmarks

should be identified and marked with the patient in the position in which

eFONA will be undertaken. In obesity, ultrasound may help but is an

acquired skill.

• During airway difficulty, eFONA equipment should be called for early. If

difficulty progresses, it should be opened and prepared, well before it is

needed. This reduces delays and is a cognitive aid.

• Continue oxygenation efforts from above during insertion.

See also % p. 1095.

Scalpel cricothyroidotomy

(See Fig. 15.7.)

• Cricothyroidotomy ‘kits’ should be immediately available wherever GA

is induced.

• Less fine motor skill is required than cannulation.

• with a cuffed TT, scalpel cricothyroidotomy allows effective

conventional ventilation, capnography and oxygenation faster than

cannula techniques, while preventing aspiration.

• Tracheal location can be confirmed by capnography or FOB.

• Risks include failure, bleeding (sufficient to obscure the scalpel, bougie

or TT entering the trachea), creating a false passage, soft tissue

trauma and tracheal ± oesophageal damage. An uncuffed TT risks

hypoventilation and aspiration.

Cannula cricothyroidotomy

• Cannulating may be more familiar than using a scalpel.

• Insert a narrow (<4mm ID) cannula through the cricothyroid

membrane.

• Tracheal position must be confirmed by aspirating air during and after

insertion. It is important to confirm position before ventilating.

• Attach a high- pressure ventilation device. Cannulae may enable

wire- guided dilation to insert a tracheostomy tube or catheter using

dedicated kits.

• Risks include failure, cannula kinking, obstruction, misplacement and

tracheal ± oesophageal damage. Some cannulae are <5cm long and may

not reach the trachea effectively with obesity or oedema.

• Risks of high- pressure source cannula ventilation include subcutaneous

emphysema (sufficient to obscure neck anatomy and reinsertion)

and barotrauma. Inadequate exhalation via an obstructed upper

airway risks breath- stacking, hyperinflation, CVS collapse and tension

pneumothoraces.

• Risks increase in emergency circumstances.

## 頁面 403

382

382 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

CALL FOR HELP

Continue 100% O

2

Declare CICO

Plan D: Emergenecy front of neck airway

Continue to give oxygen via upper airway

Ensure neuromuscular blockade

Position patient to extend neck

Scalpel cricothyroidotomy

Equipment: 1. Scalpel (number 10 blade)

2. Bougie

3. Tube (cuffed 6.0mm ID)

Laryngeal handshake to identify cricothyroid membrane

Palpable cricothyroid membrane

Transverse stab incision through cricothyroid membrane

Tum blade through 90˚ (sharp edge caudally)

Slide coudé tip of bougie along blade into trachea

Railroad lubricated 6.0mm cuffed tracheal tube into trachea

Ventilate, inflate cuff and confirm position with capnography

Secure tube

Impalpable cricothyroid membrane

Make an 8–10cm vertical skin incision, caudad to cephalad

Use blunt dissection with fingers of both hands to separate tissues

Identify and stabilise the larynx

Proceed with technique for palpable cricothyroid membrane as above

Postoperative care and follow up

•Postpone surgery unless immediately life

threatening

•Urgent surgical review of cricothyroidotomy site

•Document and follow up as in main flow chart

This flowchart forms part of the DAS Guidelines for unanticipated difficult

intubation in adults 2015 and should be used in conjunction with the text.

Fig. 15.7 Cannot intubate, cannot oxygenate. Reproduced from Difficult Airway Society

2015 guidelines for management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Difficult Airway

Society intubation guidelines working group, BJA, 115(6), 827– 48. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aev371.

permission for the use of these algorithms for commercial purposes must be sought directly from

Difficult Airway Society as they hold the copyrights.

Ventilating with narrow (<4mm ID) cannulae

• Cannulae <4mm ID require a high-p ressure O source using commercial

2

‘injectors’ or an improvised apparatus from ‘wall’ 4 bar O. These may

2

take time to collect and assemble. A breathing system or self-i nflating

bag is ineffective.

• Exhalation must occur via the upper airway as the cannula is too

narrow. Maximise upper airway patency (e.g. airway manoeuvres), and

leave any OpA or SGA in place from plan B or C.

## 頁面 404

EMERGENCy FRONT OF NECK AIRwAy 383

• If exhalation is impossible, reduce O flow to <0.5L/ min. This provides

2

some O and reduces risks created by hyperinflation.

2

• hypercapnia is a risk. Make a rapid plan for conversion to a definitive

airway. Ask for specialist surgical assistance if available.

• The Ventrain® is a single- use device capable of O insufflation and

2

generation of subatmospheric pressure (suction) to improve expiration

through a 2mm ID catheter. Failed ventilation and hyperinflation risks

are reduced.

• The Rapid- O® device for jet ventilation has a flow and pressure release

2

enabling potentially safer oxygenation.

Ventilation with wide (≥4mm ID) cannulae

• Catheters ≥4mm ID are suitable for conventional ventilation but may

only be adequate when cuffed or the upper airway is obstructed.

• Larger catheters can be placed with a Seldinger technique, e.g. Cook®

Melker cricothyrotomy catheter (4.0 mm ID uncuffed / 5.0mm ID

cuffed).

Paediatric considerations

(See % pp. 923–4.)

• CICO is rare in infants.

• The cricothyroid membrane is cephalad and difficult to identify.

• Models suggest scalpel and cannula techniques have high risks of

posterior tracheal wall and oesophageal damage.

• Cannula cricothyroidotomy may be preferable because it risks less

damage to surrounding neck structures.

• Adult eFONA techniques may be appropriate in older children.

Further reading

Duggan LV, Ballantyne Scott B, Law JA, et al. (2016). Transtracheal jet ventilation in the ‘can’t intubate

can’t oxygenate’ emergency: a systematic review. Br J Anaesth, 117 suppl 1:i28– 38.

Cook TM, woodall N, Frerk C; Fourth National Audit project (2011). Major complications of airway

management in the UK. Results of the Fourth National Audit project of the Royal College of

Anaesthetists and Difficult Airway Society. part 1: anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth, 106, 617– 31.

henderson JJ, hamaekers AE (2011). Equipment and strategies for emergency tracheal access in the

adult patient. Anaesthesia, 66 Suppl 2, 65– 80.

Cook TM, Nolan Jp, Cranshaw J, et al. (2007). Needle cricothyroidotomy. Anaesthesia, 62, 289– 90.

## 頁面 405

384

384 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Emergency management of the

obstructed airway

This section concerns unexpected critical airway obstruction (e.g. pre-

senting to ED or occurring on a ward or ICU). Elective or fast-t rack man-

agement of partial airway obstruction in ENT patients is discussed on %

pp. 762–4.

• These cases are always difficult and stressful for the patient and the

airway team.

• Unfamiliar environments and personnel require heightened ‘situation

awareness’. Establish experience and skill of individuals at the scene.

Summon multidisciplinary senior and expert help urgently.

• Approaches to relieving the obstruction differ according to:

• Level(s) of obstruction.

• Urgency. This limits time to investigate the site, extent and severity of

the obstruction and the involvement of related structures.

• The patient’s physiological state. hypoxic patients can be anxious,

confused and uncooperative.

• The patient’s location. The airway team’s preferred location is

usually a dedicated equipped operating theatre, but the patient’s

condition may deteriorate during, or due to, transfer. An experienced

judgement must be made whether to risk airway stabilisation in situ,

in challenging circumstances with reduced resources, or transfer to a

safer environment. Know what essential equipment can be brought

quickly to the bedside that will function effectively.

• Always give O (e.g. hFNO, nasal cannulae or mask) throughout.

2

• If inflammation is a component of the obstruction, nebulised adrenaline

(transiently) and corticosteroids (slowly) may help.

• Experienced anaesthetists and operators must agree a ‘strategy’ to

relieve the obstruction with backup plans. poor planning and execution

increase risks. Ensure your team knows what to do.

• All approaches risk life- threatening complications: bleeding, swelling and

total obstruction.

• As lesions may progress quickly, recently successful approaches to

known lesions may fail.

• H IV induction and laryngoscopy, with or without NMB, and no backup

plan, is NOT a ‘strategy’.

Assessment

• Take a careful history; ask about dyspnoea and cough, especially lying

flat, night- time panic, swallowing and reflux.

• Examine the patient. Determine best breathing position and do not

insist the patient moves from this for the purposes of examination.

Severity is suggested by respiratory distress, accessory muscle use,

voice change or inspiratory stridor (laryngeal signs), monophonic

wheeze or expiratory stridor (intrathoracic signs), positional dyspnoea,

hypoxaemia and silent chest. In chronic obstruction, signs may be

reduced or absent.

## 頁面 406

EMERGENCy MANAGEMENT OF ThE OBSTRUCTED AIR wAy 385

• Review existing investigations. In extremis, it is unlikely that further

investigation is possible, but if the situation allows, obtain:

• Nasendoscopic laryngoscopy

• CT/ MRI with 3D reconstruction

• CXR: although less informative, it is easy to obtain, non-i nvasive

and avoids the supine position. It may suggest tracheal deviation or

reduced tracheal diameter.

• Interpret all available information intelligently to ascertain:

• The level(s) of obstruction: oral, supraglottic, laryngeal, subglottic

(mid- tracheal and/ or lower tracheal)

• The nature of the lesion: mobility, friability, collapsibility and severity

• Ease of eFONA. Examine the front of the neck.

Oral, supraglottic and laryngeal obstruction

Common causes: trauma, burns, tumour, infection, stenosis.

Challenge: a safe approach to, and passage of a TT or ventilating catheter

beyond the laryngeal inlet.

• If not plan A, eFONA is often the backup plan. Thus an experienced

operator, engaged in the strategy, must be scrubbed, equipped, assisted

and ready to perform eFONA in a crisis. If this occurs, consider an SGA

to assist ventilation under GA and NMB.

• Consider prophylactically assisting oxygenation via a cricothyroid

cannula. It may enable jet ventilation in a crisis.

Options

• Awake techniques are rarely easy in distressed, hypoxic patients, but

consider ATI and awake FONA.

• SV under GA: slow incremental propofol TCI or inhalational

induction, then laryngoscopy with VL, FOB or VL- assisted FOB. Direct

laryngoscopy is not the preferred option. pass an appropriate TT or

ventilation catheter. have a backup plan for apnoea, especially if mask

ventilation will be difficult.

• In specialist hands:

• TIVA, rapid NMB and rigid bronchoscopy. The bronchoscope

establishes airway patency and acts as a dedicated airway while

assessment, ventilation, oxygenation and surgery take place.

• IV induction or TIVA, rapid NMB and insertion of an anterior

commissure laryngoscope as a conduit for a bougie, then intubation.

• with fixed laryngeal or tracheal stenosis: TIVA, rapid NMB and

insertion of an SGA as a dedicated airway prior to definitive surgical

management of the obstruction.

Subglottic: mid- tracheal

Common causes: airway or retrosternal tumour, e.g. goitre. Obstructing

masses may expand suddenly due to haemorrhage.

Challenges: passing a TT or suitable ventilating catheter into a potentially

displaced larynx and trachea and beyond the narrowing. The lesion may

preclude eFONA. Attempts may risk bleeding and complete obstruction.

• Delineating the obstruction is vital, if at all possible.

• The end of the TT or ventilating catheter must lie safely between the

end of the obstruction and the carina.

• patient position (sitting up, lateral, prone) may be crucial for SV.

## 頁面 407

386

386 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Options

• ATI. Consider if mask ventilation will be difficult. however, ATI may be

intolerable to the patient or cause crisis. Coughing, respiratory distress

and passing an FOB, TT or ventilating catheter through a narrowing may

critically increase obstruction (‘cork- in- a- bottle’).

• In specialist hands:

• FOB- guided insertion of a long, narrow TT (e.g. microlaryngeal

tube, endobronchial tube or AIC (6.3mm external diameter)) allows

conventional ventilation.

• Jet catheters (e.g. LazerJet®, hunsaker) or other narrow catheters,

such as Cook® airway exchange catheters, enable jet ventilation

but risk barotrauma. A route of exhalation is essential. A Tritube®

(4.4mm external diameter) used with a Ventrain® or Evone® ventilator

enables ‘jet’ inspiration and assisted expiration, reducing the chance

of barotrauma.

• If rigid bronchoscopy is available: IV induction and rapid NMB or

inhalational induction, and passage of a rigid bronchoscope. The

bronchoscope also allows resection, laser or stenting.

• Inhalational induction may be very slow and worsen obstruction,

especially in collapsible lesions. have a backup plan, especially if mask

ventilation is likely to be difficult.

Lower tracheal lesions and bronchial obstruction

Common causes: tumours, trauma and large mediastinal masses. These are

best managed in specialist centres with facilities for CpB but may present to

ED in extremis. Depending on the lesion, laser resection or stenting may be

required to maintain a patent airway.

Options

• Either IV induction with rapid NMB or inhalational induction followed

by passage of a rigid bronchoscope or FOB- guided double- lumen or

endobronchial tube.

Extubation

have a management plan for extubation, which may need to be delayed.

prolonged instrumentation may cause upper airway oedema. Transfer to

ICU or hDU is often necessary before extubation.

Further considerations

• A specific tissue diagnosis may enable preoperative shrinking of a lesion

with antibiotics, steroids, chemotherapy or radiotherapy where time

allows.

• heliox (premixed helium/O containing 21– 40% O) improves gas flow

2 2

through narrowed airways, but the FiO is low. Increasing FiO reduces

2 2

the effect of the helium. Specific delivery systems and ventilators for

heliox exist. heliox can be useful for any obstruction but is usually a

temporary measure while organising definitive management.

## 頁面 408

EMERGENCy MANAGEMENT OF ThE OBSTRUCTED AIR wAy 387

Further reading

Ahmad I, El- Boghdadly K, Bhagrath R, et al. (2019). Difficult airway society guidelines for awake tra-

cheal intubation (ATI) in adults. Anaesthesia, 75, 509– 29.

Cook TM, Morgan pJ, hersch pE (2011). Equal and opposite expert opinion. Airway obstruction

caused by a retrosternal thyroid mass: management and prospective international opinion.

Anaesthesia, 66, 828– 36.

patel A, pearce A, pracy p (2011). head and neck pathology. In: Cook TM, woodall N, Frerk C

(eds). 4th National Audit Project of the Royal College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society.

Major complications of airway management in the United Kingdom. Report and findings, March 2011.

London: The Royal College of Anaesthetists; pp. 143– 54. M https:// www.nationalauditprojects.

org.uk/ NAp4_ home

Nouraei SA, Giussani DA, howard DJ, et al. (2008). physiological comparison of spontaneous and

positive- pressure ventilation in laryngotracheal stenosis. Br J Anaesth, 101, 419– 23.

Gerig hJ, Schnider T, heidegger T (2005). prophylactic percutaneous transtracheal catheterisa-

tion in the management of patients with anticipated difficult airways: a case series. Anaesthesia,

60, 801– 5.

Ovassapian A, yelich SJ, Dykes MhM, et al. (1983). Fibre- optic nasotracheal intubation—i ncidence

and causes of failure. Anesth Analg, 63, 692– 5.

## 頁面 409

388

388 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Rapid sequence induction

For general information on induction of anaesthesia, see % p. 406.

• ‘Classic’ RSI comprises IV induction of anaesthesia with a

predetermined dose of induction agent, immediately followed by rapid

NMB combined with cricoid force, and tracheal intubation to reduce

the risk of pulmonary aspiration of stomach contents.

• There is variation in practice.

• If airway assessment indicates intubation will be difficult, consider a

local/ regional anaesthetic technique or ATI.

• A checklist is recommended, particularly when performing an RSI in

the non- theatre environment. Agree a strategy for failed intubation.

Difficulty occurs in 71 in 20 and failure in 71 in 200 RSIs.

Checks

• Anaesthetic machine, vaporisers and anaesthetic infusion pumps, breathing

system, ventilator, suction, intubation aids, TT cuff and rescue equipment.

• The operating table, trolley or bed should be able to lift head up and

tip down.

• Two functioning laryngoscopes (preferably including VL).

• Reliable wide- bore IV access with fluid running.

• Drawn- up predefined dose of induction agent (propofol 1–2 .5mg/ kg;

ketamine 1– 2mg/ kg; thiopental 2– 5mg/ kg). Ketamine is favoured in

unstable patients. TCI of propofol ± remifentanil is possible.

• Drawn- up predefined dose of suxamethonium (1– 1.5mg/ kg) or

rocuronium (1– 1.2mg/ kg).

• Emergency drugs (anticholinergics and vasopressors).

Procedure

• Leave an NGT in situ. Aspirate stomach contents.

• position head up 20– 25°. Use the ‘ramped’ position for obese patients.

• position in the ‘sniffing’ (‘flextension’) position with lower neck flexed,

upper neck extended on a firm pillow.

• Switch on suction. place in easy reach.

• Apply routine monitoring, including waveform capnography.

• preoxygenate. Options:

• Tight- fitting mask with O 15L/ min for 3– 5min or until ETO is >85%.

2 2

(Do not remove mask until laryngoscopy)

• hFNO

• In extreme emergency, four VC breaths with O flush.

2

• Consider peroxygenation with hFNO or nasal cannulae with O 15L/ min.

2

• Ask a trained assistant to apply cricoid force 10N (1kg), beginning as

induction starts.

• Give the induction agent, immediately followed by the NMBA.

• Ask your assistant to increase cricoid force to 30N (3kg) at full loss of

consciousness.

• Gently mask ventilate to reduce risk of hypoxaemia.

• Intubate 30– 45s after IV suxamethonium or fasciculations end, or 45–

60s after rocuronium.

• Inflate the cuff, hand-v entilate and confirm correct TT placement by

capnography and clinical examination.

• when correct TT position is confirmed, ask the assistant to remove

cricoid force.

## 頁面 410

RApID SEQUENCE INDUCTION 389

Risks

• RSI with cricoid force increases the risk of difficult intubation, partly due

to pressure of time and incorrect cricoid force.

• Excessive induction agent may cause CVS collapse, especially in the

presence of hypovolaemia or septic shock.

• Inadequate induction agent may cause tachycardia and hypertension.

Thiopental, in particular, risks accidental awareness during GA (AAGA).

Cricoid force

• Applying cricoid force is a skill. It is often poorly taught and practised.

• Learn to identify the cricothyroid membrane. It is usually in the middle

of the neck, below the ‘Adam’s apple’ at the 2nd skin crease. The

cricoid cartilage is immediately below.

• hold the cricoid cartilage between the thumb and middle finger and

push onto the neck with the index finger.

• practise applying the correct force. Compress an air-fi lled, sealed

syringe positioned vertically on the plunger. Compressing 20mL of air to

12mL, or 50mL to 32mL requires 730N (3kg).

• Correct application improves direct laryngoscopy, reduces the risk of

gastric inflation and does not occlude the airway.

• Excessive force >50N (>5kg) produces airway obstruction and makes

intubation more difficult.

• If intubation is difficult, reduce and if necessary, remove cricoid force.

This may improve the laryngeal view and enable intubation. have

suction ready. If a patient regurgitates, cricoid force may need to be

reapplied.

• BURp may improve the laryngeal view but increases the risk of

obstruction. If ventilation is difficult, remove BURp.

• Release cricoid force if a patient vomits early during induction. Vomiting

does not occur after loss of consciousness.

• Bimanual force (other hand behind the neck) has not been shown to be

of benefit in supine patients and uses up one of the assistant’s hands. It

is not recommended.

• Some patients may only tolerate cricoid force after induction.

• Applying consistent cricoid force is difficult for >5min.

• If intubation fails, cricoid force must be removed to enable SGA

placement.

Controversies

• RSI with cricoid force has not been proven to reduce aspiration.

• Titrating induction agent to loss of consciousness is sometimes

preferred.

• Rapid- acting opioids of short duration are often used to aid

haemodynamic stability and improve intubation conditions, e.g. alfentanil

(10– 30 micrograms/ kg) or remifentanil (1– 2 micrograms/ kg) 1min

before induction. Lidocaine (1–1 .5mg/ kg) is less commonly used.

• Using sufficient opioid to avoid NMB is not commonly practised nor

recommended.

• After RSI for CS, beware neonatal respiratory depression if opioids are

given to the mother on induction.

• It is a fallacy that ‘RSI is safe because the patient will wake if there are

airway complications’. In the event of failed intubation, whatever drug

combination is used, induction agents and NMBAs are very unlikely

## 頁面 411

390

390 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

to wear off before the onset of life- threatening hypoxaemia (and

awareness). Manage the airway, oxygenate and provide IV anaesthesia.

• Reversing rocuronium with sugammadex (16mg/ kg) in response to

airway difficulty is likely to be rapid only if the drug is predrawn up or

in the room in adequate quantities. It does not guarantee restoration of

breathing. It will not reverse pathological obstruction.

Paediatric considerations

(See % p. 924.)

• Appropriate cricoid force has not been established for children.

• young children are unlikely to cooperate with preoxygenation and

application of cricoid force before induction.

Further reading

McLelland Ch, Bogod DG, hardman JG (2009). pre- oxygenation and apnoea in pregnancy: changes

during labour and with obstetric morbidity in a computational simulation. Anaesthesia, 64, 371– 7.

Li Cw, Xue FS, Xu yC, et al. (2007). Cricoid pressure impedes insertion of, and ventilation through,

the proSeal laryngeal mask airway in anesthetized, paralyzed patients. Anesth Analg, 104, 1195– 8.

Neilipovitz DT, Crosby ET (2007). No evidence for decreased incidence of aspiration after rapid

sequence induction. Can J Anaesth, 54, 748– 64.

heier T, Feiner JR, Lin J, et al. (2001). hemoglobin desaturation after succinylcholine- induced apnea: a

study of the recovery of spontaneous ventilation in healthy volunteers. Anesthesiology, 94, 754– 9.

Vanner R, Asai T (1999). Safe use of cricoid pressure. Anaesthesia, 54, 1– 3.

Sellick BA (1961). Cricoid pressure to control regurgitation of stomach contents during induction of

anaesthesia. Lancet, 2, 404– 6.

## 頁面 412

INhALATIONAL INDUCTION 391

Inhalational induction

See also % pp. 408–9.

Relative indications

• To avoid IV induction: children, needle phobia, difficult IV access.

• To maintain airway patency and SV during induction:

• Anticipated difficult intubation ± difficult mask ventilation, e.g. acute

epiglottitis, perilaryngeal tumours

• Inhaled foreign body

• Bronchopleural or tracheo-o esophageal fistula.

Preparation and practice

• Explain the process to the patient/ parents/ carers on the ward. warn

parents/ carers about the ‘excitation’ stage.

• An antisialagogue is optional.

• without IV access, have a skilled assistant present to obtain IV (or

intraosseous (IO)) access at sufficient anaesthetic depth or in crisis.

• Apply routine monitoring as soon as possible.

• Use a tight-fi tting mask to speed induction. In young children, some

prefer a cupped hand to deliver the fresh gas supply initially.

• Use 100% O with actual or anticipated airway obstruction.

2

• Use sevoflurane. It is the best tolerated agent in routine use. Although

it can be started at 8%, tolerance may be improved by gradual

introduction and a 50:50 mix of NO and O, which also speeds

2 2

induction.

• when tolerated, use CpAp and gentle assisted ventilation to maintain

the airway and speed induction.

Difficulties

• Beware. A belief that inhalational induction is always safe, because if

the airway obstructs, anaesthesia will reverse and adequate SV will

restart, is not supported by fact. persistent obstruction, laryngospasm,

hypoxia and arrhythmia can occur and lead to morbidity and mortality.

Anticipate difficulty. have a rescue plan.

• Mask leak, low alveolar ventilation (e.g. partial/i ntermittent obstruction,

breath- holding) and high CO slow induction.

• The correct stage to cannulate veins, instrument the airway, apply

cricoid force or intubate is a matter of experience and may be

misjudged.

• During airway intervention, rapid offset with sevoflurane may cause

lightening of anaesthesia.

• The ‘excitation’ stage may be long and associated with complications.

Induction will only progress if the airway is patent.

• Additional cautious IV induction, while maintaining spontaneous

breathing, may rarely be appropriate.

• Inhalational induction may be part of a ‘strategy’ for managing airway

obstruction, but you must have backup plans.

## 頁面 413

392

392 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

A spontaneous breathing technique with propofol TCI

Maintaining spontaneous breathing during slow, careful induction by incre-

mental propofol TCI is an alternative to inhalational induction. It similarly

demands early detection of airway problems. It also requires understanding

and experience of the effects of pre- programmed pharmacokinetic models,

particularly as they relate to weight, obesity and children. It has some

advantages:

• Sedative levels of propofol provide anxiolysis, assisting the progress of

anaesthesia.

• Increasing depth of anaesthesia is independent of ventilation.

• The rate of increase in depth is titrated by the anaesthetist (not dictated

by the patient).

• In difficulty, stopping the infusion enables anaesthesia to lighten, without

requiring a patent airway.

• Airway reflexes (coughing, bucking and laryngospasm) can be rapidly

suppressed.

• Secretions are not increased.

• Assisted ventilation may be attempted at an earlier stage, even when

still responsive to verbal stimulus.

• Airway adjuncts are also tolerated considerably earlier.

• Staff and the environment are not exposed to anaesthetic gases.

Paediatric considerations

(See % pp. 919–20.)

• Explanation and support are essential.

• Optimal positioning depends on size. young children may settle best

on the carer’s lap. The carer should be instructed to restrain the child

gently during induction. For older children, sitting on a trolley may be

more appropriate.

Further reading

patel A, pearce A, pracy p (2011). head and neck pathology. In: Cook TM, woodall N, Frerk C

(eds). 4th National Audit Project of the Royal College of Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society.

Major complications of airway management in the United Kingdom. Report and findings, March 2011.

London: The Royal College of Anaesthetists; pp. 143– 54. M https:// www.nationalauditprojects.

org.uk/ NAp4_ home

## 頁面 414

AwAKE TRAChEAL INTUBATION 393

Awake tracheal intubation

• ATI must be considered when airway management will, or is, predicted

to be hazardous.

• ATI should be the first plan when ventilation by face mask or SGA will

be difficult and front of neck anatomy impedes elective and emergency

tracheal access.

• ATI should present low risks to patients, preserving airway tone,

patency and SV.

• In experienced hands, ATI has 98% success with either FOB or

VLs.4 Other devices may be used, depending on experience and

circumstance.

• Success depends on setup, skill, cooperation and safe, effective LA.

Sedation is optional but has risks. Oxygenation remains the priority.

• have backup plans for airway obstruction and inadequate ventilation,

including postponement, high-r isk GA and eFONA.

Indications

• Known or anticipated difficult airway: particularly if backup plans are at

higher than normal risk of failure (e.g. morbid obesity, OSA)

• Known or suspected C- spine instability (e.g. trauma or RA)

• head and neck pathology affecting the airway or its manipulation

• progressive airway obstruction

• previous failed intubation.

Relative contraindications

• Unreliable cooperation that jeopardises safety and success

• Airway contamination likely to obscure scope optics (e.g. bleeding)

• Coagulopathy. Beware causing bleeding, particularly by the nasal route

• Critical airway obstruction (e.g. periglottic masses and stenosis). Beware

causing complete airway obstruction, laryngospasm and coughing.

Absolute contraindications

• patient refusal

• LA allergy.

Procedure

• Explain the procedure to the patient and obtain consent.

• Consider antisialagogue premedication and sedation.

• Decide an airway topicalisation method.

• Optimise setting and ‘ergonomics’. Ideally, use an operating theatre.

• Organise your team. Rescue strategies must be ready and understood.

Include and ready the surgical team.

• Consider using a checklist or cognitive aid to improve teamwork.

• Consider the DAS ATI method (Fig. 15.8).

• Apply routine monitoring.

• Maintain oxygenation with supplemental O, hFNO if available.

2

• Clear a soiled airway carefully with suction.

• Limit the number of attempts (preferably ≤3 and one by an expert).

• After intubation, visualise the carina AND confirm intubation success

with capnography by connecting the breathing system. The bag should

move with respiration when the cuff is inflated.

## 頁面 415

394

394 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

ekawa

rof

senilediug

yteicos

yawria

tlucffiiD

.)9102(

.la

te

.,I

damhA

morf

decudorpeR

.euqinhcet

ITA

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

8.51

.giF

.yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

eht

fo

noissimrep

dnik

htiw

82

–905

,)4(57

,aisehtseanA

,stluda

ni

)ITA(

noitabutni

laehcart

## 頁面 416

AwAKE TRAChEAL INTUBATION 395

Local anaesthesia

• Specific airway nerve blocks (sphenopalatine, ethmoid,

glossopharyngeal, superior laryngeal, recurrent laryngeal) can be

effective in skilled hands. Topical LA is an alternative.

• The DAS ATI LA technique is outlined in Fig. 15.8. Lidocaine is

potentially safer than other LAs. Nebulised, it has variable success.

Transtracheal LA injection is invasive, effective and ensures careful

examination of the front of the neck. The total dose of lidocaine should

not exceed 9mg/ kg, but this is rarely needed.

• Treatments for toxicity must be immediately available.

Postoperative care

• plan extubation and potential reintubation carefully. If the airway

remains at risk, delay extubation. The TT may need to be exchanged for

another type or size to facilitate intensive care.

• postoperatively, if you can, check if direct laryngoscopy is possible.

• Keep the patient starved until airway sensation and reflexes have

returned. After lidocaine, this usually takes >2h.

• Reusable FOB, VLs and other instruments must be decontaminated and

disinfected.

Dealing with difficulty

Sedation

• Sedation can help anxiety, discomfort and intolerance but can cause

airway obstruction, cardiorespiratory depression and hypoxia. Sedation

is not a substitute for effective LA.

• A cautious remifentanil or dexmedetomidine infusion may be safer than

propofol.4 Another anaesthetist monitoring sedation improves safety.

Adding another drug (e.g. midazolam) adds risk. Antagonists must be

immediately available if using opioids and benzodiazepines.

Oral route

• Specialised FOB conduits, e.g. the Berman Airway, Ovasappian Airway

and williams Airway Intubator, protect the FOB and can improve

laryngoscopy. however, they may not fit well and move from the

midline, making laryngoscopy and intubation difficult.

• Awake insertion of an SGA as a conduit has been described.

Nasal route

• This may be the only option with a narrow gape.

• Assess the patency of nasal passages and any history of epistaxis.

• Topical vasoconstrictors (e.g. phenylephrine) reduce bleeding risk.

• Guiding a TT through the nose with an FOB before advancing to the

larynx avoids realising the TT will not pass through the nose later.

• Nasal dilators (e.g. lubricated nasopharyngeal airway or hegar cervical

dilators) may make TT passage easier but risk epistaxis.

## 頁面 417

396

396 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Type of tracheal tube

• with an FOB, use a TT with a rounded tip (optimised), e.g. LMA

Fastrach™ or parker Flex- Tip™. A small size that fits snugly on the FOB

reduces laryngeal impingement during passage and airway trauma.

• Optimised TT, sizes and introducers, including simultaneous FOB, might

also increase VL ATI success.

• Effective TT lubrication is essential.

Technique

• Using an FOB, ‘black’ is the airway, and ‘pink’ the airway wall. Aim for

‘black’.

• ‘Red out’ suggests the FOB tip is against the mucosa. withdraw until

recognisable structures are seen, then advance more slowly, avoiding

the mucosa.

• If negotiating the oropharynx is difficult: ask the patient to protrude

their tongue and jaw; ask an assistant to pull the tongue forwards with

gauze and provide gentle jaw thrust; or insert a laryngoscope.

• Ask the patient to breathe deeply to inhale LA into the trachea and

widen the aperture as the TT approaches the glottis.

• Railroading problems may be overcome by gentle anticlockwise TT

rotation.

• warn the patient that breathing may be difficult as you railroad the TT.

Complications

• Refusal, coughing, airway bleeding, laryngospasm, vomiting,

regurgitation, aspiration, airway obstruction, hypoxaemia.

• Complications may occur in up to 18% of cases. Call for help early.

Further reading

woodall NM, harwood RJ, Barker GL (2008). Complications of awake fibreoptic intubation without

sedation in 200 healthy anaesthetists attending a training course. Br J Anaesth, 100, 850– 5.

walker A, Smith A (2007). promoting awake fibreoptic intubation. RCoA Bulletin, 46, 2329– 33.

popat M (2001). Practical Fibreoptic Intubation. Oxford: Butterworth- heinemann.

Ovassapian A, Krejcie TC, yelich SJ, et al. (1989). Awake fibreoptic intubation in the presence of a

full stomach. Br J Anaesth, 62, 13– 16.

Ovassapian A, yelich SJ, Dykes MhM, et al. (1983). Fibre- optic nasotracheal intubation—i ncidence

and causes of failure. Anesth Analg, 63, 692– 5.

Ahmad I, El-Boghdadly K, Bhagrath R, et al. (2020). Difficult Airway Society guidelines for awake

tracheal intubation (ATI) in adults. Anaesthesia, 75, 509–28.

## 頁面 418

ApNOEIC OXyGENATION 397

Apnoeic oxygenation

• preceded by effective preoxygenation, administering O

2

via a patent

airway prolongs time to desaturation during apnoea.7

• Alveolar O diffusing into blood draws O from the airways by

2 2

convection. Optimising lung volume and blood flow matching, e.g. by

positioning and CpAp, may enhance this process. Air entrainment must

be minimised.

• Insufflation sources for airway surgery include nasal cannulae, a RAE

TT wrapped round the cheek, nasopharyngeal airways and catheters,

dedicated ports on surgical laryngoscopes and bronchoscopes, and

airway and cricothyroid catheters.

• Note that insufflation devices rarely incorporate pressure-l imiting

valves. Inadequate O egress from the airway can cause barotrauma.

2

High-fl ow nasal oxygenation

hFNO systems deliver heated, humidified O via nasal cannulae at up to

2

50– 70L/ min. perioperative systems typically provide 100% O only. with

2

SV, hFNO can provide CpAp (75cmhO) when the mouth is closed.

2

Anatomical dead space and upper airway resistance are reduced.

Uses of HFNO

To decrease the risk of hypoxia during intubation in

• Anticipated and known difficult airway management

• RSI

• Obesity (BMI >40kg/m 2)

• OSA

• Obstetric patients

• Critically ill patients.

with a patent upper airway, hFNO can enable prolonged apnoeic oxy-

genation during airway management. Beware. An airway rescue strategy

is essential.

Tubeless anaesthesia

• Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventilatory exchange (ThRIVE),

i.e. continuous hFNO during apnoea, is a method of increasing apnoea

time in patients with difficult airways undergoing ‘tubeless’ upper airway

surgery.

• Sustained oxygenation may exceed 30min, sometimes up to 71h, in

some low- risk patients.

• patient selection is crucial. hypoxaemia onset is more rapid with

obesity.

• Although gas mixing by turbulence and cardiogenic airway oscillation

enables some CO clearance, some hypercarbia is the norm.

2

• ETCO measurement can be obtained by intermittent ventilation but

2

values underestimate paCO which rises unpredictably. paCO may be

2 2

>10kpa after 20min. Blood gas or transcutaneous CO monitoring has

2

been recommended but is not routine.

## 頁面 419

398

398 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Contraindications to HFNO

• Maxillofacial trauma (e.g. base of skull, mid- facial fractures)

• Epistaxis

• Nasal obstruction

• Airway laser or diathermy (fire risk)

• Lack of patient cooperation

• Contraindications to CpAp.

A plan for preoxygenation and THRIVE with HFNO

• Set up and warm the system before the patient arrives.

• Apply hFNO at 720L/ min immediately on arrival.

• Ask the patient to breathe through their nose, mouth closed.

• position 20– 45° head up.

• Increase O flow to 50– 70L/ min if tolerated.

2

• After induction and loss of consciousness, maintain oropharyngeal

patency with two- handed jaw thrust.

• Increase O flow to 70L/ min.

2

• place nasal cannulae on the forehead.

• Confirm you can mask ventilate.

• Return the nasal cannulae to the nares.

Special considerations

• To reduce barotrauma risk, make sure the ApL valve of any breathing

system is fully open if you apply simultaneous mask O and hFNO.

2

• Even though hFNO may provide prolonged oxygenation, when an

aspiration risk is present or the airway may be lost, secure the airway by

intubation as quickly as feasible.

Further reading

patel A, Nouraei SA (2015). Transnasal humidified rapid- insufflation ventilatory exchange (ThRIVE):

a physiological method of increasing apnoea time in patients with difficult airway. Anaesthesia,

70, 323–9.

hermez LA, Spence CJ, payton MJ, et al. (2019). A physiological study to determine the mechanism

of carbon dioxide clearance during apnoea when using transnasal humidified rapid insufflation

ventilatory exchange (ThRIVE). Anaesthesia, 74, 441– 9.

Lyons C, Callaghan M (2019). Uses and mechanisms of apnoeic oxygenation: a narrative review.

Anaesthesia, 74, 497– 507.

Gustafsson IM, Lodenius Å, Tunelli, et al. (2017). Apnoeic oxygenation in adults under general anaes-

thesia using Transnasal humidified Rapid- Insufflation Ventilatory Exchange (ThRIVE)— a physio-

logical study. Br J Anaesth, 118, 610– 17.

ward JJ (2013). high-fl ow oxygen administration by nasal cannulae for adult and perinatal patients.

Respir Care, 58, 98– 122.

Groves N, Tobin A (2007). high flow nasal oxygen generates positive airway pressure in adult volun-

teers. Aust Crit Care, 20, 126– 31.

## 頁面 420

EXTUBATION AFTER DIFFICULT INTUBATION 399

Extubation after difficult intubation

• Develop a ‘strategy’ for extubation that manages airway obstruction.

Extubation should not be an emergency.

• Check any required equipment. Assemble and brief skilled personnel.

Assess risks of laryngeal dysfunction on extubation (e.g. recurrent

laryngeal nerve injury, laryngospasm), difficult reintubation (e.g. bleeding

and swelling) and new airway impediments (e.g. cervical fusion, external

fixators, dental wiring).

• Consider surgical airway optimisation (e.g. haemostasis, haematoma

evacuation, stitches to bring the tongue forward).

• If your strategy in difficulty is eFONA, consider an elective FONA.

• If deferring extubation might reduce risks, consider postponing

extubation and reassessing.

• Consider a course of corticosteroids to reduce inflammatory oedema.

Preparation before extubating awake

• Clear the entire upper airway carefully.

• Suction the trachea.

• Empty the stomach, if necessary.

• perform a ‘leak’ test. Deflate the cuff (if present). Ventilate at low

pressure. Check for leak around the TT. If there is no leak, consider

deferring extubation. (The sensitivity and specificity of this test are

imperfect and depend critically on TT size.)

• place the patient in their most advantageous position for breathing and

airway patency. This is often sitting up.

• preoxygenate to an ETO 70.9.

2

• Insert a ‘bite block’ to prevent TT or SGA occlusion.

• Fully reverse NMB.

• wake.

• Extubate when obeying commands and breathing normally.

• Anaesthetics with rapid offset may be advantageous.

• provide high-fl ow O, hFNO or CpAp as indicated.

2

• Monitor in the recovery period for as long as necessary.

Difficult Airway Society extubation guidelines (2015)

(See Figs. 15.9 and 15.10.)

• ‘Low- risk’ patients are at low risk of aspiration, exacerbations of life-

threatening disease and airway compromise.

• ‘At- risk’ patients are at risk of aspiration, acute exacerbation of life-

threatening conditions (e.g. bronchospasm, cardiac failure, raised ICp),

airway obstruction (e.g. due to airway trauma, surgery, oedema, OSA,

obesity) and difficult rescue oxygenation.

• Awake extubation is the default for both groups. All other techniques

are considered ‘advanced’ and require practice, teamwork and attention

to detail.

• In ‘low- risk’ patients, extubating during ‘deep’ anaesthesia may reduce

risks of exacerbating life- threatening conditions and adverse surgical

outcomes (e.g. bleeding and dehiscence). however, these benefits

must be balanced with risks of airway obstruction after extubation, and

coughing and laryngospasm during emergence.

## 頁面 421

400

400 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

.la

te

,M

tapop

morf

decudorpeR

.mhtirogla

ksir

-wol

:senilediuG

noitabutxE

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

9.51

.giF

taerG

fo

stsitehtseanA

fo

noitaicossA

eht

morf

noissimrep

htiw

,04

–813:76

;2102

aisehtseanA

.noitabutxe

laehcart

fo

tnemeganam

eht

rof

senilediuG

.dtL

gnihsilbup

llewkcalB

/dnalerI

&

niatirB

## 頁面 422

EXTUBATION AFTER DIFFICULT INTUBATION 401

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

.la

te

,M

tapop

morf

decudorpeR

.mhtirogla

ksir

-ta

:senilediuG

noitabutxE

yteicoS

yawriA

tlucffiiD

01.51

.giF

taerG

fo

stsitehtseanA

fo

noitaicossA

eht

morf

noissimrep

htiw

,04

–813:76

;2102

aisehtseanA

.noitabutxe

laehcart

fo

tnemeganam

eht

rof

senilediuG

.dtL

gnihsilbup

llewkcalB

/dnalerI

&

niatirB

## 頁面 423

402

402 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

• For some ‘at-r isk’ patients, two ‘advanced’ techniques may reduce

risks of exacerbating life- threatening conditions and adverse surgical

outcomes, but avoid these techniques if reintubation will be difficult.

• Remifentanil infusion- assisted extubation. Emergence occurs during

remifentanil suppression of airway reflexes. The TT is tolerated

during SV or breathing to command. Extubation occurs awake with

patient cooperation. Beware. perfect titration can be difficult.

• TT exchange for an SGA. Emergence with an SGA in situ maintains

the airway, is usually well tolerated and may reduce risks of laryngeal

soiling. Several methods exist. Deep anaesthesia or NMB are needed

to avoid airway reflexes during exchange. Airway pathology or

surgery can preclude SGA insertion.

• One ‘advanced’ technique, proposed when reintubation will be

difficult, involves inserting an airway exchange catheter as a conduit for

reintubation.

• All staff caring for the patient require training in airway exchange

catheter use.

• The airway exchange catheter is passed through the TT into the

trachea before extubation. Thin airway exchange catheters (11 Fr)

can be tolerated awake. LA applied to the airway exchange catheter

improves tolerance.

• The airway exchange catheter must be secured above the carina

(depth marker ≤25cm from the mouth in adults) and position

checked with CXR.

• Distal migration can cause perforation.

• Reintubation is complex and requires great care for success. If

reintubation is required, anaesthesia, NMB, a narrow specialised

TT if possible (e.g. LMA Fastrach™ or parker FlexTip®) and VL aid

reintubation.

• O should NOT be given via an airway exchange catheter. If required,

2

O should be delivered by conventional means.

2

Further reading

Maclean S, Lanam C, Benedict w, et al. (2013). Airway exchange failure and complications with the

use of the Cook airway exchange catheter: a single centre cohort of 1177 patients. Anesth Analg,

117, 1325– 7.

popat M, Mitchell V, Dravid R, et al.; Difficult Airway Society Extubation Guidelines Group (2012).

Difficult Airway Society Guidelines for the management of tracheal extubation. Anaesthesia, 67,

318– 40.

Duggan LV, Law JA, Murphy MF (2011). Brief review: supplementing oxygen through an airway ex-

change catheter: efficacy, complications, and recommendations. Can J Anaesth, 58, 560– 8.

## 頁面 424

AIRBORNE RESpIRATORy VIRUSES 403

Airborne respiratory viruses

• The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome-c oronavirus- 2

(SARS-C oV- 2) in 2019 led to a global pandemic of this coronavirus

disease (COVID- 19).

• previous coronavirus outbreaks included SARS-C oV (causing severe

acute respiratory syndrome) and MERS- CoV (causing Middle East

respiratory syndrome). Similar outbreaks should be anticipated.

• These viruses are spread by inhalation of droplets and aerosols at short

distances. Contact and distant aerosol spread are controversial.

• Some airway procedures have been designated as aerosol-generating

procedures (AGps) requiring enhanced precautions against aerosol

transmission. The science supporting this is evolving.

• Appropriate steps should be taken during airway management to

reduce cross- infection risk.

• Fundamental infection control includes: separating patients with and

without infection; isolation; exemplary cleaning, decontamination and

disinfection processes; minimising ‘footfall’ and the duration of direct

patient care; and training in donning and doffing personal protective

equipment (ppE).

Tracheal intubation

This should be Safe, Accurate and Swift (SAS).

Safe: for both staff and patient

• Ensure adequate preparation by using a checklist.

• wear ppE for AGps (e.g. FFp3/ N95 filter mask, eye protection, fluid-

resistant long- sleeved gown, gloves).

• when you can, use a well-v entilated room (e.g. >12 air changes/h),

ideally with negative pressure.

• Minimise staff present: an intubator, an assistant and a ‘runner’ outside

the room.

• place a combined hME/viral filter between the breathing system and

catheter mount.

• Insert a closed tracheal suction system.

• Avert accidental disconnection. push and twist circuit connections.

• Check and appropriately preset a ventilator.

• Minimise or avoid mask ventilation or airway pressure before

intubation. If ventilation is necessary, use low O flow. Optimise mask

2

seal with a ‘VE’ grip (thumbs caudad on each side of the mask with your

fingers lifting the jaw; ask an assistant to squeeze the bag).

• Inflate the TT cuff before ventilating. Avoiding leakage, manage cuff

pressure appropriately when possible.

• Minimise any breathing system disconnection during the procedure.

Accurate (familiar and reliable technique)

• Maximise first attempt success: use experienced intubator; familiar kit,

including VL; rapid, complete NMB.

• Use rescue techniques in which you are trained and that are proven and

reliable. Avoid untried and untested techniques.

• Use a second- generation SGA for airway rescue (better seal).

## 頁面 425

404

404 ChApTER 15 Airway assessment and management

Swift (timely, without rush or delay)

• preoxygenate for 3–5 min with routine monitoring.

• Use an RSI technique for emergency intubation. Consider ketamine 1–

2mg/ kg, rocuronium 1.2mg/k g or suxamethonium 1.5mg/k g (maximum

150mg). prepare for CVS instability.

• Rapidly confirm successful tracheal intubation with capnography.

Confirm mechanical ventilation and O presettings are appropriate.

2

Further reading

Cook TM (2020). personal protective equipment during the coronavirus disease (COVID) 2019

pandemic— a narrative review. Anaesthesia, 75, 920– 7.

Cook TM, El- Boghdadly K, McGuire B, et al. (2020). Consensus guidelines for managing the airway

in patients with COVID- 19. Guidelines from the Difficult Airway Society, the Association of

Anaesthetists the Intensive Care Society, the Faculty of Intensive Care Medicine and the Royal

College of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia, 75, 785– 99. M https:// doi.org/ 10.1111/ anae.15054

Tran K, Cimon K, Severn M, et al. (2012). Aerosol generating procedures and risk of transmission

of acute respiratory infections to healthcare workers: a systematic review. PLoS One, 7, e35797.

References

1 Lundstrom L, Rosenstock C, wetterslev J, et al. (2019). The DIFFMASK score for predicting diffi-

cult facemask ventilation: a cohort study of 46,804 patients. Anaesthesia, 74, 1267– 76.

2 Detsky ME, Jivraj N, Adhikari NK, et al. (2019). will this patient be difficult to intubate?: the ra-

tional clinical examination systematic review [published correction appears in JAMA (2020) 323,

1194]. JAMA, 321, 493– 503. doi:10.1001/ jama.2018.21413

3 De Jong A, Molinari N, Terzi N, et al. (2013). Article 1. Early identification of patients at risk

for difficult intubation in the intensive care unit: development and validation of the MACOChA

score in a multicenter cohort study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 187, 832– 9. doi:10.1164/

rccm.201210- 1851OC

4 Ahmad I, El- Boghdadly K, Bhagrath R, et al. (2020). Difficult Airway Society guidelines for awake

tracheal intubation (ATI) in adults. Anaesthesia, 75, 509– 28.

5 Nolan Jp, Kelly FE (2011). Airway challenges in critical care. Anaesthesia, 66 (Suppl 2), 81– 92.

6 Brimacombe J, Keller C, Vosoba Judd D (2004). Gum elastic bougie- guided insertion of the

proSeal™ Laryngeal Mask Airway Is superior to the digital and introducer tool techniques.

Anesthesiology, 100, 25– 9.

7 patel A, Nouraei SA (2015). Transnasal humidified rapid-i nsufflation ventilatory exchange

(ThRIVE): a physiological method of increasing apnoea time in patients with difficult airway.

Anaesthesia, 70, 323– 9.

