# Chapter 16: Conduct of anaesthesia

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 426-469*

---

## 頁面 426

Chapter 16 440055

Conduct of anaesthesia

John Newland and Heng- Yi (Henry) Wu

Induction of general anaesthesia 406

Maintenance and TIVA 410

Sedation 419

Neuromuscular blockade 420

Neuromuscular function monitoring 423

Reversal of neuromuscular blockade 425

Depth of anaesthesia monitoring 426

Cardiac output monitoring 430

Temperature control 434

Patient positioning for surgery 435

Alexandra Cardinal and Nicholas Eaddy

Postoperative nausea and vomiting 442

See also

% Conduct of anaesthesia pp. 913–25

## 頁面 427

406

406 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Induction of general anaesthesia

Induction of GA establishes a state of reversible unconsciousness smoothly,

safely and pleasantly, while maintaining haemodynamic stability and ventila-

tion. Risk assessment, planning and vigilance are needed during this time of

complex physiological change. For patients and relatives, this is a time of un-

familiarity, anxiety and stress. establishing rapport and putting the patient at

ease during induction is an important skill to master, with each anaesthetist

developing their own techniques and style to achieve this.

Preparation for induction

Induction plan

This should be based on your preoperative assessment of the patient (see

% p. 23).

• The detail of this assessment will depend on the urgency of the

operation and the complexity of the patient and surgery.

• Particular focus should be paid to airway assessment, aspiration risk,

allergies, stability of comorbidities and cardiopulmonary reserve.

• Consider backup plans and communicate these to your team.

• Seek advice if the assessment identifies significant issues.

Theatre preparation

ensure anaesthetic equipment is checked and emergency equipment is

available. Prepare drugs, with emergency drugs rapidly accessible.

• ensure WhO Surgical Safety Checklists are followed (see % p. 5).

Preparing for induction

Positioning

The patient’s head should be placed in the sniffing position (neck flexed and

head extended), with the head end of the bed elevated 20– 30°. Morbidly

obese patients should be in the ramped position.

Preoxygenation

Aim for an eTO >80% to allow for a longer safe apnoea time. An air-

2

tight seal with the mask is important to increase eTO. Application of PeeP

2

(by closing the APL valve slightly), CPAP (by using the ventilator) or nasal

cannulae (for apnoeic oxygenation) can be helpful in patients who may de-

saturate quickly.

Environment

A quiet atmosphere prior to induction is important to help reduce patient

anxiety and allow the focus to remain on the patient.

Difficulties with induction

Induction can be a busy and complex time. Unexpected haemodynamic

instability or a difficult airway can quickly task- overload anaesthetists and

potentially deteriorate into an emergency.

• Do not hesitate to ask for a 2nd pair of experienced hands to be

present during induction if difficulties are anticipated.

Induction technique

Induction is accomplished using either IV or inhalational agents or a com-

bination of both. Careful preassessment will determine the induction tech-

nique and doses of induction agents.

## 頁面 428

INDUCTION OF GeNeRAL ANAeSTheSIA 407

Intravenous induction

IV induction is faster and more reliable than inhalational induction and is

generally preferred in adults.

• Multiple drugs are often co-a dministered to reduce dose- dependent

side effects of each individual drug.

Induction agents

• Propofol (1– 2.5mg/k g) is the commonest agent used. It provides rapid

onset and emergence, making it suitable for day case surgery. It has

antiemetic properties and can be used for maintenance of anaesthesia.

Propofol obtunds airway reflexes and as such, it is the ideal drug to use

with an SGA. Moderate hepatic or renal impairment do not alter its

pharmacokinetics significantly.

• Ketamine (1– 2mg/ kg IV or 5– 10mg/ kg IM) has multiple administration

routes available, making it very versatile. Despite having a direct

myocardial depressant effect, sympathetic stimulation results in a largely

cardiovascularly stable induction. Airway reflexes and respiratory drive

are preserved, but i salivation can lead to upper airway obstruction. It

is frequently used in the eD and the prehospital environment.

• Thiopental (2– 5mg/ kg) produces a smooth induction of anaesthesia

with a well-d efined endpoint, usually within 30s. Airway reflexes are

largely preserved, making it less suitable for use with an SGA. Intra-

arterial injection can cause tissue necrosis.

• etomidate (0.3mg/k g) is useful for induction of haemodynamically

unstable patients as it causes the least cardiovascular depression of all

the IV induction agents. Controversy exists around its use as it causes

reversible adrenocortical suppression for 12– 24h. A single induction

dose is safe, but continuous infusions may lead to an increase in

mortality in critically ill patients.

Titrating propofol

Propofol causes the greatest fall in BP of all IV induction agents, primarily

due to vasodilation. It therefore requires careful titration of a ‘sleep dose’,

with consideration of factors such as patient weight, age, CO and arm–

brain circulation time.

• In low CO states (shocked patients or the elderly), the body

compensates by diverting a higher proportion of the CO to the brain,

reducing flow to other areas of the body. This results in a smaller initial

volume of distribution and a greater proportion of the drug diverted

towards the cerebral circulation. Furthermore, the time taken for the

drug to reach the brain is prolonged. Thus, a slow titration of a reduced

dose is the safer way to induce these patients.

Opioids

Opioids work synergistically with propofol to allow a dose reduction, as

well as obtund the autonomic response to airway instrumentation.

• Timing of administration should take into consideration time to peak

effect. Fentanyl (1– 2 micrograms/ kg) should be administered 3– 5min

prior to the induction agent, whereas alfentanil (10–3 0 micrograms/ kg)

or remifentanil can be administered concurrently due to their faster

onset of action.

## 頁面 429

408

408 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Adjuncts

• Midazolam (0.5–5 mg) is commonly used as a co- induction agent

to reduce the propofol dose required, therefore minimising the

cardiovascular effects of propofol. It can also reduce the incidence

of PONV.

• Lidocaine (0.5–1 .5mg/ kg) can reduce the induction dose, as well as

blunt stimulus from airway instrumentation. A small amount (20–4 0mg)

can be added to 200mg of propofol to reduce pain on injection.

Neuromuscular- blocking agents

NMBAs (see % pp. 420–2) are generally used to facilitate intubation, but

care must be taken to avoid awareness. As such, NMBAs should only be

given after loss of consciousness.

Rapid sequence induction

An RSI (see % pp. 388–90) is performed in those with a high aspiration

risk. This technique involves delivering a predetermined dose, rather than

a sleep dose, of IV induction agent, avoiding titration. This is immediately

followed by an NMBA and early intubation.

• Opioids, particularly alfentanil, can be considered for use in RSI.

Other considerations

• Adequate depth of anaesthesia needs to be achieved prior to insertion

of an SGA to avoid biting, hiccupping, breath- holding or laryngospasm.

Reduce opioid dose to facilitate SV.

• Spontaneous breathing induction of anaesthesia with slow incremental

titration of a TCI of propofol is a useful technique, particularly in airway

surgery.

• In those with actual, or potential for, haemodynamic instability,

preloading with IV fluid and co- administration of a vasopressor infusion

may be necessary.

• high-d ose opioid, including remifentanil, may be used to blunt the

sympathetic response to laryngoscopy.

Inhalational induction

(See also % p. 919.) Indications for inhalational induction (see % pp. 391–2)

include:

• Avoiding awake IV access, e.g. in children, needle- phobic patients and

patients with difficult IV access

• To maintain SV during induction (TIVA is becoming more popular for

this indication).

Inhalational induction, whether of a child or an adult, requires cooperation

from the patient. Age- appropriate explanation and interaction form part of

the ‘art of anaesthesia’.

• Sevoflurane is the commonest agent used and the best tolerated. A

50:50 mix of NO:O improves tolerance and speeds onset.

2 2

• If inhalational induction is used for difficult IV access, have a skilled

assistant present to secure cannulation early.

## 頁面 430

INDUCTION OF GeNeRAL ANAeSTheSIA 409

Paediatric considerations

Parental understanding and support are essential, as their assistance is often

very useful. Warn parents about the excitation phase, with noisy breathing

and movement to be expected.

• Optimal positioning will depend on child size. Between ages 2 and 5,

the child can be sat on the parent’s lap, with the parent cuddling/g ently

restraining the child during induction. For older and younger children,

the operating table or bed may be more appropriate.

• A close- fitting face mask speeds up induction; however, in those

children not wanting to accept a mask, a cupped hand to deliver the

fresh gas supply can be used initially before moving to a mask.

• Slowly uptitrating sevoflurane is better tolerated in children.

Difficulties with inhalational induction

• In adults, it can take a long time to achieve adequate depth of

anaesthesia. It can be further slowed by a leak around the mask, airway

obstruction, breath- holding and high CO.

• The excitement stage may be long and associated with complications

such as airway obstruction. Induction will only progress past this phase

if the airway remains patent. Application of PeeP/C PAP/ gentle assisted

ventilation can be useful if airway obstruction occurs.

• H The traditional view that inhalational induction is safe because if the

airway obstructs, anaesthesia will lighten is false. The NAP4 report1

highlighted that in practice, when total airway obstruction occurs,

patients do not exhale the volatile and hypoxia rapidly ensues. If

this technique is used for a difficult airway, have backup airway plans

prepared.

Further reading

King A (2019). Induction of general anesthesia: overview. [In UpToDate database on the Internet] M

https:// www.uptodate.com/ contents/ induction- of- general- anesthesia- overview

## 頁面 431

401

410 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Maintenance and TIVA

Following induction of anaesthesia, maintenance may be achieved by ei-

ther inhalational or IV anaesthesia, or a combination of both. The choice

of which technique to employ comes down to patient and surgical factors,

as well as the anaesthetist’s preference. No matter what technique is em-

ployed, the endpoints for maintenance anaesthesia remain the same: un-

consciousness, amnesia, analgesia, akinesia and physiological homeostasis.

The maintenance period between induction and emergence requires the

application of a wide range of knowledge and skills, as well as planning and

vigilance.

Phases of anaesthesia care

Induction: mind the gap

The shift from induction to maintenance phases frequently requires transi-

tioning between anaesthetic agents, commonly IV to volatile. This requires

careful attention, as the offset of IV induction agents can occur before the

volatile has reached adequate levels, resulting in a period where the overall

concentration of anaesthetic agents may be lower than desirable. This time

also coincides with transferring and positioning of patients, during which

ventilation, and thus volatile delivery, can be interrupted. Consequently,

this phase of anaesthesia is associated with a higher incidence of accidental

awareness. To reduce this risk, an age- adjusted MAC target of at least 0.7

should be achieved as soon as possible following induction.

• Complicating this period is a high incidence of post-i nduction

hypotension. Causes are multifactorial, but it is associated with older

age, emergency surgery and higher ASA scores. even short periods of

pre- incisional hypotension have been linked to unfavourable patient

outcomes.

• The transition phase is a balancing act between providing adequate

anaesthesia to prevent awareness and avoiding the vasodilatory effect

of the anaesthetic agents.

• Fluid boluses and vasopressors should be used to treat hypotension,

instead of reducing the depth of anaesthesia.

Maintenance

Both depth of anaesthesia and analgesia are not static and may require ti-

tration, especially during periods of intense stimulation such as surgical in-

cision, dilation of sphincters, tunnelling of ventriculoperitoneal shunts, etc.

experienced anaesthetists are often able to predict stages in the surgery

where anaesthetic levels will need to be titrated, minimising haemodynamic

changes.

Emergence

Optimal timing for discontinuation of anaesthetic agents will depend on the

specific agents, doses used and the duration of their administration, as well

as patient- specific factors. A conservative approach is advised as the out-

comes of early emergence tend to be worse than delayed emergence.

## 頁面 432

MAINTeNANCe AND TIVA 411

Paralysis

The depth of anaesthesia for maintenance requires consideration of

whether NMBAs are used. Without NMBAs, maintenance anaesthesia

needs to be dosed higher to inhibit spinal reflexes and prevent movement.

When using NMBAs, a lower dose is required to maintain unconsciousness

and prevent awareness only. however, NMBAs are a known risk factor for

awareness as movement, a marker of light depth of anaesthesia, is inhibited.

Combined technique

All maintenance anaesthetic agents have dose- dependent cardiovascular ef-

fects and variable offset times. Combined techniques, using inhalational and

IV techniques, can be used to minimise the total dose of any one agent, thus

minimising side effects and potentially hastening emergence, particularly in

long procedures. however, this does increase complexity and the risk of

error, possibly increasing the likelihood of awareness from underdosing or

cardiovascular compromise from a ‘double anaesthetic’. Depth of anaes-

thesia monitoring (see % pp. 426–9) should be considered if this technique

is employed, particularly when using NMBAs.

Inhalational anaesthesia

Volatile agents remain key components of modern GA. They are proven to

be safe, easy to use and effective. There are, however, disadvantages, many

being dose-d ependent (Table 16.1).

Table 16.1 Advantages and disadvantages of inhalational agents

Advantages Disadvantages

ease of administration Myocardial depression and vasodilation

IV not required for induction i risk of PONV

end- tidal concentration gives Trigger for Mh

estimate of effect site concentration Potent greenhouse gases

Anaesthetic preconditioning Tocolytic

Bronchodilation Airway irritation (isoflurane, desflurane)

emergence delirium in children

The dose of volatile agents is dependent on their potency, which is ex-

pressed as the minimum alveolar concentration of a volatile, at one atmos-

pheric pressure, producing immobility in 50% of adult subjects exposed to

a standard noxious stimulus (MAC). MAC values differ for each agent and

are inversely related to lipid solubility. Desflurane is the least lipid-s oluble;

thus, 6.6% is required to achieve 1 MAC, whereas sevoflurane is more lipid-

soluble and only requires 1.8% for 1 MAC.

• Memory formation is inhibited at around 0.3 MAC (MAC aware) and

loss of movement to command is 0.5– 0.7 (MAC awake). Therefore,

we expect an inadequately anaesthetised patient to move before

experiencing recall. Opioids dramatically reduce the MAC required to

suppress movement due to effects on the spinal cord, but have a lesser

effect on the dose required to suppress awareness.

### 表格


| Table 16.1 Advantages and disadvantages of inhalational agents |
| --- |
| Advantages Disadvantages |
| ease of administration Myocardial depression and vasodilation IV not required for induction i risk of PONV end- tidal concentration gives Trigger for Mh estimate of effect site concentration Potent greenhouse gases Anaesthetic preconditioning Tocolytic Bronchodilation Airway irritation (isoflurane, desflurane) emergence delirium in children |



## 頁面 433

421

412 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

• MAC requirement is also dependent on a number of patient

characteristics. Concurrent use of CNS depressants, patients’

haemodynamic state and their age are the most important covariates to

consider, with most anaesthetic machines now providing age-a djusted

MAC values.

Titration of volatiles

Speed of volatile onset and offset is determined by: FGF, inspired concen-

tration of volatile, FRC, minute volume, CO and blood gas solubility.

• There is no significant difference in onset between commonly used

volatiles, but this is not the case for offset.

• With longer duration of anaesthesia, volatile solubility and body

composition become increasingly important factors determining offset.

This is due to accumulation of volatile in tissues. Modern anaesthetic

agents such as sevoflurane and desflurane have relatively low

solubility and thus have a distinct advantage over older volatiles such

as isoflurane. The more soluble the agent, the sooner washout must

commence as the operation ends, to allow timely emergence.

Sevoflurane

Fast uptake and elimination due to low blood and tissue solubility, allowing

rapid titration and recovery. Non- pungent, thus suitable for inhalational

induction.

Desflurane

has the lowest blood and tissue solubility of the potent volatile inhalation

agents, resulting in very rapid uptake and elimination, with little accumula-

tion in tissues. It is beneficial in prolonged operations, the morbidly obese

and those for whom an accelerated emergence is desired. It is pungent and

thus unsuitable for inhalational inductions. It can also cause airway irritation,

tachycardia, bronchospasm or laryngospasm, particularly in asthmatics or

when rapidly uptitrated. The benefits of desflurane need to be weighed

against its higher cost and negative environmental impact, as it is a potent

greenhouse gas.

Isoflurane

Now less commonly used due to the favourable properties of newer

agents. Slower offset due to higher blood and tissue solubility, compared

with sevoflurane and desflurane.

Nitrous oxide

Commonly used as an adjuvant to volatile anaesthetics during induction;

less commonly used for maintenance. It is inexpensive and widely available.

Co- administration allows for a reduction in MAC of other volatile agents,

but it cannot be used as the sole agent due to its low potency. It is rapidly

titratable due to its low solubility and is useful for its analgesic and anxiolytic

properties. It increases the incidence of PONV, but this can be overcome

by antiemetic prophylaxis. It must be avoided in patients with gas-t rapped

spaces (e.g. bowel obstruction, middle ear conditions, pneumothorax,

pneumocephalus). NO is also a greenhouse gas and contributes to ozone

2

depletion.

## 頁面 434

MAINTeNANCe AND TIVA 413

TIVA

TIVA utilises IV agents alone, avoiding the use of inhalational agents.

Although theoretically any combination of induction agent and opioid can

be used, in practice, the commonest agent used is propofol alongside an

opioid. Pharmacokinetic models for TCI have resulted in i use of TIVA in

various clinical settings (Table 16.2).

Table 16.2 Advantages and disadvantages of TIVA

Indications and advantages Disadvantages

Reduced PONV Plasma or effect site concentrations

Improved quality of recovery are not easily measured

Does not require an anaesthetic Potentially i risk of awareness

machine— useful for remote- Dependent on the continuity of a

location anaesthesia and functioning IV line

transporting intubated patients TCI models may be inaccurate in

Safe in Mh some patients (e.g. obese)

Can be used for surgery requiring Syringes need to be replaced

spinal cord monitoring (scoliosis intraoperatively, presenting

surgery) opportunity for error

Ideal for tubeless airway surgery Pain on injection

Potentially more environmentally May require additional monitoring

friendly than gases and vapours equipment (processed eeG)

Reduced emergence delirium in May be more expensive than

children volatiles

Choice of agent

Ideal TIVA agents have fast onset and offset to allow rapid titration and

recovery. Generally, the offset of IV agents slows as the duration of the

infusion increases, which is reflected in the context- sensitive half- time

(CShT). Propofol and remifentanil exhibit short CShTs and thus are the

closest to ideal TIVA agents available. Opioids serve two purposes during

TIVA. They provide analgesia and allow a reduction in the required dose

of propofol due to their synergistic effect. If remifentanil is used, a longer-

acting opioid should be given 30– 40min prior to stopping the infusion to

cover postoperative pain.

Administering TIVA

There are several effective ways to perform TIVA. The use of TCI is recom-

mended over other methods, if available.

Anaesthetist- administered boluses

Can be useful for very short procedures but often results in excessive drug

at the time of bolus or inadequate effect prior to the next bolus. This oscil-

lation can lead to cardiovascular instability and/o r awareness.

Manually controlled infusion regimes

These regimes allow anaesthetists to utilise a ‘multicompartmental model’

without the use of pharmacokinetic infusion pumps. They are not appro-

priate for all patients. Boluses and infusion rates may need to be altered to

achieve adequate depth of anaesthesia (Table 16.3).

### 表格


| Table 16.2 Advantages and disadvantages of TIVA |
| --- |
| Indications and advantages Disadvantages |
| Reduced PONV Plasma or effect site concentrations Improved quality of recovery are not easily measured Does not require an anaesthetic Potentially i risk of awareness machine— useful for remote- Dependent on the continuity of a location anaesthesia and functioning IV line transporting intubated patients TCI models may be inaccurate in Safe in Mh some patients (e.g. obese) Can be used for surgery requiring Syringes need to be replaced spinal cord monitoring (scoliosis intraoperatively, presenting surgery) opportunity for error Ideal for tubeless airway surgery Pain on injection Potentially more environmentally May require additional monitoring friendly than gases and vapours equipment (processed eeG) Reduced emergence delirium in May be more expensive than children volatiles |



## 頁面 435

441

414 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Table 16.3 Suggested manual infusion regimes for propofol and remifentanil

Propofol

Known as the 50mL of 1% 1mg/ kg induction bolus

‘Bristol’ regime propofol 10mg/ kg/ h for 10min

Achieves a plasma (500mg) 8mg/ kg/ h for 10min

propofol concentration 6mg/ kg/ h for maintenance

of 73 micrograms/ mL

Remifentanil

Achieves a remifentanil Remifentanil 50 0.5 micrograms/ kg/ min for 3min

plasma concentration of micrograms/ mL 0.25 micrograms/ kg/ min for

76 nanograms/ mL maintenance

Target- controlled infusions

TCIs allow accurate maintenance of concentrations of anaesthetic agents.

The technique requires an infusion pump programmed with a pharmacokin-

etic model. Instead of selecting a set rate, a target concentration is set, with

a target of either plasma (Cpt) or effect site (Cet). The pump will automat-

ically adjust its infusion rate to achieve a predicted target site concentration.

Basic pharmacokinetics

A multicompartment model is often used to describe the redistribution and

elimination of drugs such as propofol. The drug is delivered into a central

compartment (V), with the initial induction bolus calculated according to

1

the estimated volume of V. The drug is then distributed to compartments

1

V and V. Movement of the drug between compartments is governed by

2 3

rate constants (K) (Fig. 16.1).

• Although the various compartments are often equated to biological

compartments within the human body, such as blood vessel rich/

poor, this is technically incorrect. Compartments and rate constants

are purely a mathematical construct used to predict target site

concentrations, with the models validated in small populations of

patients.

• Depending on which model is used, compartmental size and rate

constants can be either fixed or variable. Variable parameters are

determined by patient data entered into the pump.

Plasma vs effect site targeting

Cpt achieves and maintains a predetermined target plasma concentration

of drug as rapidly as possible without overshooting. Plasma concentration

will not approximate effect site (CNS) concentration until a steady state is

reached, which can take a number of minutes. Thus, onset of anaesthesia

using Cpt is slow. This can be overcome by targeting a higher Cpt transi-

ently during induction, then reducing it to the desired maintenance level.

Cet achieves a faster effect site concentration by overshooting the plasma

concentration and, as such, is more useful for rapidly achieving the desired

depth of anaesthesia.

## 頁面 436

MAINTeNANCe AND TIVA 415

Drug administered

Ra

V

pi

2

dly

K12 V1 K13 V3

Central Slowly equilibrating

equilibrating

compartment K21 compartment K31 compartment

K1e

K10

Ve Ke0

Drug eliminated Effect site

Fig. 16.1 The multicompartment pharmacokinetic model. K refers to the rate

constant of transfer between compartments.

Starting infusions

• Use a TIVA checklist for safety (Table 16.4).

• Timing of when to start each infusion should be guided by time to

peak effect. If using Cet, both remifentanil and propofol can be started

simultaneously. If using Cpt, remifentanil will equilibrate at the effect

site long before propofol, potentially leading to an apnoeic (but aware)

patient. In this instance, propofol should be started first.

• Some anaesthetists employ a stepwise increase of target concentrations,

starting at 0.5– 1.0 micrograms/ mL of propofol and increasing by 0.5–

1.0 micrograms/ mL increments once the target site has equilibrated.

This method avoids a large initial bolus and the associated CVS

instability. It also allows identification of the Cet at which the patient

becomes unrousable. The target concentration is i above this level for

a layer of safety, but it does guide the minimal level that will be required

to keep the patient anaesthetised.

Maintenance

When used correctly, TCI accurately predicts measured plasma concentra-

tions of drugs in most patients. however, due to pharmacodynamic vari-

ation, target concentrations must still be titrated to achieve the required

effect in any individual. Targets need to be adjusted based on age, ASA

status, adjuvant agents used, degree of surgical stimulation and processed

eeG (Table 16.5).

When to stop the infusions

This is a balance between maintaining adequate anaesthesia and facilitating

rapid emergence. TCI targets can be gradually d near the end of surgery,

but caution must be exercised as wound closure can sometimes be a signifi-

cant noxious stimulus.

## 頁面 437

461

416 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Table 16.4 TIVA checklist

Infusion Prior to using pumps, ensure they are serviced, plugged into the

pumps mains power and charged.

checked ensure low- and high- pressure alarms are set— this can warn of

disconnection or a blocked cannula, respectively.

A well- Ideally insert the line yourself and avoid sites where a tissued

functioning line is hard to detect, e.g. antecubital fossa. Secure the line firmly

IV line to the patient’s skin.

Keep the line visible throughout the case to allow early

identification of disconnection, leakage or a tissued cannula.

TIVA Use a dedicated TIVA administering set which incorporates:

administering • Antisiphon valves on the drug lines

tubing • A non- return valve on the IV fluid line

• Minimal dead space between the patient and where the drugs

and IV fluid mix

• Luer lock rather than Luer slip connections.

Drug have drugs already drawn up in preparation for syringe

preparation exchanges.

Monitoring Consider processed eeG, particularly if NMBAs are used.

Practical ensure the infusion continues after altering pump settings or a

aspects syringe exchange.

Specific to Be aware that most TCI pumps will forget their programming

running TCI with complete failure of both mains and battery power.

have a backup plan in the event of pump failure.

ensure the right model is used for the right drug.

ensure drug dilutions and syringe size and type are correctly

entered into the pump.

Double- check patient data are entered correctly.

ensure targets are suitable for the patient’s age and ASA status.

Table 16.5 Suggested minimum TCI target concentrations

Age Spontaneous breathing IPPV

Propofol Remifentanil Propofol Remifentanil

(micrograms/ mL) (nanograms/ mL) (micrograms/ mL) (nanograms/ mL)

<50 4– 6 1– 3 3– 4 5– 8

>50 2– 4 1– 2 2– 3 3– 6

• Avoid reducing targets inappropriately to facilitate a more rapid

emergence, particularly in short cases. however, after a prolonged

TIVA- based anaesthetic, often emergence is slow and reducing targets

before the end of surgery may be appropriate. This can be guided by

processed eeG monitoring if used or with knowledge of the Cet at

which the patient became unrousable.

## 頁面 438

MAINTeNANCe AND TIVA 417

• Most patients wake at a propofol Cet of 1– 2 micrograms/ mL.

Remifentanil can be continued at an effect site of 1–2 nanograms/ mL

to smooth extubation and then stopped. H Remain vigilant for post-

extubation apnoea.

Schnider vs Marsh

each pharmacokinetic model uses different fixed and variable parameters,

which helps to explain some of the important differences.

• early Marsh models only provided Cpt, though the newer Modified

Marsh now provides Cet. Age and weight are entered into the pump;

however, only weight is used to calculate compartment sizes. The age

input is only there to prevent the model’s use in those <16y.

• Schnider’s model provides both Cpt and Cet. Age, sex, weight and

height parameters are entered into the pump.

• The most important clinical difference between Schnider and Marsh

is the V compartment size. Marsh is 19.4L vs Schnider 4.27L for an

1

85kg person. As a result, Marsh will give a larger bolus when uptitrated,

compared to Schnider (when the same target site is used). This is

important because:

• Schnider may be more useful in frail/u nstable adults as

haemodynamic side effects are lessened.

• Using Cpt with Schnider should really be avoided as the fixed, small

V leads to inconsistent results with inappropriately small boluses,

1

independent of patient size.

Depth of anaesthesia monitoring for TIVA

H As TIVA has no ‘end-t idal’ equivalent, it is recommended that processed

eeG monitoring be used as an additional tool to determine depth of anaes-

thesia, particularly in paralysed patients (see % pp. 426–9).

Morbid obesity

TIVA in the morbidly obese is practised, but caution must be exercised as

TCI models are not validated in these patients and as such, target concen-

trations become unreliable. Currently, there is no consensus on whether

to input total, lean, ideal or adjusted bodyweight for these patients. If TCI

is used, target concentrations should be titrated to clinical effect, with pro-

cessed eeG strongly recommended. The recent development of models

specifically designed for the morbidly obese will likely resolve many of these

issues.

Children

The use of TIVA in children is becoming increasingly popular due to reduc-

tion in PONV and emergence delirium, as well as use in conditions such

as muscular dystrophy and central core myopathy. Paediatric TCI models

include:

• Kataria: 3– 16y and >15kg

• Paedfusor: 1– 16y and 5– 61kg.

Although this age group seems predisposed to propofol-r elated infusion

syndrome in critical care settings, the risk of this developing during anaes-

thesia seems exceptionally low.

## 頁面 439

481

418 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Environmental impact of anaesthesia

As there is minimal metabolism of inhalational agents, nearly all end up in

the environment unchanged. Although globally they are a small contributor

to total greenhouse gas emissions, health organisations and anaesthetists

have an important role to play in mitigating climate change and environ-

mental degradation by reducing our carbon footprint. Per bottle of vola-

tile, sevoflurane (250mL) produces 49kg of CO equivalents, whereas

2

desflurane (240mL) produces 886kg.2

• The climate crisis has repercussions for population health.3 Reducing

carbon emissions is vital to mitigate this effect. Anaesthetists are well

placed to make these reductions within health care.

• Anaesthetic gases have a damaging effect on the environment.2

The NhS Long Term Plan 2019 identifies reducing anaesthetic

gas emissions as part of achieving net zero emissions by 2050.4 In

particular, desflurane and NO should be avoided as much as possible.

2

• Peripheral nerve blocks, neuraxial blocks and TIVA are significantly

less carbon-i ntensive than volatiles,5,6 and should be considered

whenever clinically appropriate.

• Currently, anaesthetic gas capture technology is not widely

established. As such, reliance on the future potential of technology is

insufficient to meet the requirements of the NhS Long Term Plan.

• Other important concerns include embodied carbon within

equipment and pharmaceuticals, as well as the significant contribution

of the supply chain.7 For example, over their lifetime, reusable

equipment has been consistently shown to cost less and have a lower

carbon footprint than disposable items.8

• Medical waste is tangible evidence of anaesthesia’s environmental

impact, but strategies to manage waste alone only addresses a small

fraction of the carbon footprint of health care.7

• By choosing low- carbon, sustainable, cost- effective treatments and

technologies, it is possible to maintain or improve patient outcomes

while reducing the environmental, social and economic impacts of

anaesthetic practice.

Courtesy of Dr Chris Allen, environmental Sustainability (Anaesthetic) Fellow, Newcastle, UK.

Further reading

Al- Rifai Z, Mulvey D (2016). Principles of total intravenous anaesthesia: practical aspects of using

total intravenous anaesthesia. BJA Educ, 16, 276– 80. doi: 10.1093/ bjaed/ mkv074

Al- Rifai Z, Mulvey D (2016). Principles of total intravenous anaesthesia: basic pharmacokinetics and

model descriptions. BJA Educ, 16, 92– 7. doi: 10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mkv021

Campbell M, Pierce JMT (2015). Atmospheric science, anaesthesia, and the environment. BJA Educ,

15, 173– 9. doi: 10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mku033

## 頁面 440

SeDATION 419

Sedation

See % Premedicants, p. 66; for premedication in children, see % pp. 917–18.

Sedation refers to the use of drugs to produce anxiolysis, analgesia and a

degree of amnesia, to allow patients to tolerate uncomfortable treatments

or investigations without resorting to GA. Anaesthetists are well placed to

provide effective and safe sedation. When offered by non-a naesthetists, the

level of training, techniques used and degree of observation of the patient

are highly variable.

• There is a perception that sedation is less stressful or safer than GA.

Sedation may be requested in isolated areas such as radiology or the

eD. Standards of equipment, assistance and monitoring may not be the

same as in theatre. Nonetheless, sedation has the potential to pose

significant risks.

• Sedation is a continuum from alertness to GA. Therefore, definitions of

levels of sedation are somewhat arbitrary.

Minimal sedation

Minimal sedation is where a mild anxiolytic is provided. The patient remains

conscious and has normal response to verbal stimulation.

Conscious sedation

Conscious sedation refers to a state where the patient may have their

eyes closed but will still obey commands or respond to verbal interaction.

Respiration is usually preserved.

Deep sedation

The patient responds only to repeated or painful stimuli, by purposeful

movement (not simply withdrawal). Manoeuvres may be required to keep

the airway open. This state is close to GA and may inadvertently turn into it.

Good practice

It is good practice to perform a full anaesthetic assessment on someone

requiring sedation. Insert a cannula and apply routine monitoring. An anaes-

thetic assistant is likely to be helpful.

• Titrate drugs slowly to effect. Short- acting benzodiazepines are effective

for anxiolysis and amnesia, but have no analgesic effect. Opioids have

synergistic effects if used with them. TCI propofol is a good choice, as it

is highly titrable if the patient becomes too deep.

• Often the most stimulating part is near the beginning, e.g. injection of

LA into a sensitive area.

• Sedation is often carried out on elderly patients with significant

comorbidities. Sedation in the elderly may produce paradoxical

disinhibition and agitation.

• Communication is reassuring to the patient and allows monitoring of

their conscious level.

Further reading

Blayney MR (2012). Procedural sedation for adult patients: an overview. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care

Pain, 12, 176– 81. doi:10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mks016

## 頁面 441

420

420 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Neuromuscular blockade

Depolarising agents

Suxamethonium is the only depolarising NMBA in clinical use. Given IV

(dose 1– 2mg/ kg), it has a fast onset of action (<1min), making it the ideal

agent when performing an RSI or for use in an airway emergency. Its short

duration of action (5–1 0min) also means that it is well suited for procedures

that require a brief period of muscle relaxation (e.g. eCT). Suxamethonium

can also be given IM (dose 2– 4mg/ kg) in the absence of IV access.

Metabolism is by plasma cholinesterase, a hepatically synthesised circu-

lating enzyme. Acquired factors that reduce the level of circulating plasma

cholinesterase (e.g. hepatic diseases, malnutrition) or reduce plasma cholin-

esterase activity (e.g. presence of anticholinesterase drugs, pregnancy) can

therefore lead to an increase in duration of action.

Congenital factors, such as variants in the genes that encode the plasma

cholinesterase enzyme, can reduce its activity and prolong the duration of

action of suxamethonium (Table 16.6).9

Adverse effects of suxamethonium may be predictable or unpredictable.

Table 16.6 Inheritance of plasma cholinesterase

Type Genotype Dibucaine Apnoea Incidence

number duration

Normal eueu 80 1– 5min 94%

Atypical euea 60 10min 1:25

Atypical eaea 20 2h 1:3000

Silent eues 80 10min 1:25

Silent eses Minimal 2h 1:100 000

activity

Fluoride- resistant euef 75 10min 1:300 000

Fluoride- resistant efef 65 2h 1:150 000

Predictable adverse effects

Related to muscle fasciculation:

• Postoperative myalgia, especially in young, muscular adults.

• Increase in ICP and IOP. This is of minimal clinical significance in healthy

patients but makes suxamethonium relatively contraindicated in those

with an already raised ICP (e.g. traumatic brain injury) or in situations

where any rise in IOP is undesirable (e.g. penetrating eye injury).

• Increase in plasma K+ concentration (by 0.5mmol/L after 1mg/ kg dose).

This is inconsequential in most patients but may have deleterious effects

in those who are already hyperkalaemic (see % pp. 240–1).

• Parasympathomimetic actions, especially after repeated doses in

children. These include bradycardia and i salivary and bronchial

secretions.

## 頁面 442

NeUROMUSCULAR BLOCKADe 421

Unpredictable adverse effects

• H Anaphylaxis; suxamethonium has the highest rate of anaphylaxis,

compared to other NMBAs (11 per 100 000 exposures in the NAP6

study).10

• H Mh; suxamethonium is a known triggering agent in predisposed

individuals.

• H exaggerated hyperkalaemic response. This is due to the proliferation

of extrajunctional, fetal- type nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in certain

neuromuscular conditions (spinal cord injury, muscular dystrophies,

prolonged immobilisation) and after severe burns. Stimulation of

these abnormal receptors by suxamethonium results in greater than

expected intracellular to extracellular K+ leakage. Suxamethonium is safe

within the first 24h of spinal cord injury or burns, with risk increasing

after 2– 3d.

Non- depolarising agents

Non-d epolarising NMBAs can be classified by their structures into

aminosteroids (rocuronium, vecuronium) and benzylisoquinoliniums

(mivacurium, atracurium).

Dosing is based on the dose at which 50% of the patients would achieve a

95% twitch height depression (eD ). After a standard intubation dose (eD

95 95

× 2), onset of action is within 2–3 min and duration of action ranges from

15min (mivacurium) to 30– 40min for other agents. Onset of action for

rocuronium can be reduced to within 30s when given at a higher dose (eD

95

× 4), making it a useful alternative to suxamethonium when performing an

RSI (Table 16.7).

Table 16.7 Dosing of non-d epolarising NMBAs

Non- depolarising ED95 Dose for standard intubation

NMA

Rocuronium 0.3mg/ kg 0.6mg/ kg (1– 1.2mg/ kg for RSI)

Vecuronium 0.05mg/ kg 0.1mg/ kg

Mivacurium 0.07mg/ kg 0.15mg/ kg

Atracurium 0.25mg/ kg 0.5mg/ kg

Cisatracurium 0.05mg/ kg 0.1mg/ kg

elimination of aminosteroids is by a combination of hepatic metabolism

and biliary and renal excretion. Mivacurium is metabolised by plasma cho-

linesterase and its duration of action can be prolonged by the same factors

as outlined above for suxamethonium. The metabolism of atracurium is

unique in that the majority of the drug undergoes non- organ- dependent

hofmann elimination (spontaneous degradation at body temperature and

physiological ph), making it the ideal agent for use in patients with hepatic

or renal impairment.

### 表格


| Table 16.7 Dosing of non-d epolarising NMBAs |
| --- |
| Non- depolarising ED95 Dose for standard intubation NMA |
| Rocuronium 0.3mg/ kg 0.6mg/ kg (1– 1.2mg/ kg for RSI) Vecuronium 0.05mg/ kg 0.1mg/ kg Mivacurium 0.07mg/ kg 0.15mg/ kg Atracurium 0.25mg/ kg 0.5mg/ kg Cisatracurium 0.05mg/ kg 0.1mg/ kg |



## 頁面 443

422

422 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Adverse effects of non- depolarising NMBAs

• Rocuronium: pain on injection.

• Atracurium: direct histamine release and production of a potentially

epileptogenic metabolite (laudanosine). Cisatracurium is an

enantiomerically pure preparation of atracurium that is more potent

with less or no histamine release and significantly lower laudanosine

concentrations.

• Anaphylaxis: rates are said to be similar among the non-d epolarising

NMBAs (3– 6 per 100 000 exposures in the NAP6 study),10 although

some data suggest a higher rate for rocuronium.11 H Risk of cross-

reactivity is high between suxamethonium and aminosteroid NMBAs; in

these patients, consider using a central neuraxial or regional anaesthesia

technique. If this is not possible, consider a relaxant-f ree GA technique.

If an NMBA is necessary, consider using cisatracurium or atracurium

due to their low intrinsic rates of anaphylaxis and low risk of cross-

reactivity in the setting of proven NMBA hypersensitivity.11

## 頁面 444

NeUROMUSCULAR FUNCTION MONITORING 423

Neuromuscular function monitoring

H Monitoring of neuromuscular function is mandatory whenever an

NMBA is used. It can be used at induction to optimise timing for tracheal

intubation, during maintenance to guide repeat NMBA dosing and at emer-

gence to aid reversal of NMBA.

• A peripheral nerve stimulator (PNS) is applied to the skin over a

peripheral nerve such as the ulnar nerve. It delivers a current of

40– 70mA, a supramaximal stimulus sufficient to depolarise all axons.

The different patterns of stimulation and their uses in different clinical

situations is summarised in Table 16.8.12

• Assessment of muscle contractions may be qualitative or quantitative.

• Qualitative assessment relies on the visual and/ or tactile confirmation

of muscular contractions and is therefore limited by its subjective nature

and its inability to discern minor degrees of block. For example, fade

on the train- of- four (TOF) cannot be detected subjectively at a TOF

ratio (TOFR) >0.4; for double- burst stimulation (DBS), this occurs at

TOFR >0.6.

• Quantitative assessment is the gold standard. This employs a mechano-

myographic, accelero-m yographic or kine- myographic device coupled

to the patient’s thumb to objectively measure the number and strength

of adductor pollicis contractions.

• If the hands are not accessible, stimulation of the facial nerve and

qualitative assessment of orbicularis oculi and corrugator supercilii

muscle contractions is a reasonable alternative.

• Clinical tests such as sustained head lift or hand grip for 5s have

traditionally been used as indicators of adequate reversal of NMB. They

have been shown to be inaccurate and unreliable and should not inform

clinical practice.

## 頁面 445

424

424 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Table 16.8 Patterns of stimulation

Pattern of Muscle response to Muscle response Uses

stimulation depolarising NMBA to non- depolarising

NMBA

Single twitch Determines

(ST): one onset of

stimulus at 1s action.

or 10s intervals Stimulus Stimulus Requires

(1 or 0.1hz) a baseline

measurement

before NMBA

administration

Response during Response during

onset of block onset of block

Train of four Assesses

(TOF): four degree of non-

stimuli at 0.5s depolarising

intervals (2hz) Stimulus Stimulus NMBA block

and recovery

without

needing a

baseline

Response during Response during measurement.

partial blockade partial blockade Allows for

(no fade) (fade) quantitative

assessment

using TOFR

Post- tetanic evaluation of

count (PTC): the degree

tetanic of block even

stimulation Stimulus Stimulus when there is

(50hz for 5s), no response to

3s pause, then TOF

ST stimulation

at 1hz

Response not Response

useful clinically

Double- burst Slight

stimulation qualitative

(DBS): two improvement

bursts of two in the

minitetanic Stimulus Stimulus evaluation

50hz stimuli of fade,

separated by compared with

0.75s TOF- induced

Response during Response during fade

partial blockade partial blockade

(no fade) (fade)

## 頁面 446

ReVeRSAL OF NeUROMUSCULAR BLOCKADe 425

Reversal of neuromuscular blockade

Why reverse neuromuscular blockade?

Postoperative residual curarisation (PORC) is defined as having a TOFR

of <0.9 after anaesthesia. It is common (estimated incidence of 40% in re-

covery)13 and often under- recognised.

• PORC is associated with i rates of postoperative pulmonary

complications such as respiratory failure, microaspirations, hypoxaemia

and the need for reintubation.

How to reverse neuromuscular blockade

Suxamethonium- and mivacurium-i nduced NMB does not require pharma-

cological reversal. Giving an anticholinesterase drug may paradoxically in-

crease the duration of block due to inhibition of plasma cholinesterase.

For other NMBAs, anticholinesterase drugs and sugammadex are the

two main classes of reversal agents available. The choice of agent and dose

required depend on the type of NMBA used and the depth of paralysis at

the time of reversal. This is summarised in Table 16.9.13

• Neostigmine is an example of an anticholinesterase. When given at a

dose of 0.05– 0.07mg/ kg, it has an onset time within 1– 2min, reaching

its peak effect around 10min, and duration of action of around 30min. It

is co-a dministered with an antimuscarinic drug such as glycopyrronium

(dose 0.01– 0.015mg/k g) to mitigate anticholinesterase action at

muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.

• Sugammadex is a cyclodextrin compound designed specifically to

encapsulate aminosteroid NMBAs. Onset is rapid (within 2–3 min),

even in the setting of profound aminosteroid-i nduced NMB, when

given in appropriate doses. Sugammadex cannot be used to reverse

non- aminosteroid- induced NMB.

Table 16.9 Time course of recovery from rocuronium- induced neuromuscular

blockade, associated monitoring and appropriate reversal

Depth of Time after 0.6mg/ kg Neuromuscular Reversal drug and

block dose of rocuronium monitoring modalities dosage (mg/kg)

(median and range in TOFC PTC TOFR SGX Neo

min)

Profound 5(3– 15) 0 0 0 16 None

Deep 12(5– 22) 0 ≥1 0 4– 8 None

Moderate 26(17– 38) 1– 3 NA 0 2 0.05–

0.07

Shallow 30(20– 45) 4(fade) NA 0.1– 0.4 2 0.05

Minimal 43(30– 60) 4(no NA >0.4 to 2 0.02

fade) <0.9

Full 50(35– 85) 4(no NA ≥0.9 None None

recovery fade)

Neo, neostigmine; PTC, post- tetanic count; SGX, sugammadex; TOFC, train- of- four count;

TOFR, train- of- four ratio.

## 頁面 447

426

426 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Depth of anaesthesia monitoring

AAGA with explicit recall of intraoperative events is relatively common;

prospective studies using the modified Brice interview have consistently re-

ported an incidence of around 1–2 per 1000 cases.14 Retrospective studies,

such as NAP5, reveal a much lower incidence (1 per 20 000 cases overall).15

Regardless, its occurrence can be devastating to the patient, with long-t erm

psychological harm such as post- traumatic stress disorder a possibility.

AAGA occurs when too little anaesthetic is delivered to the brain. This

may be due to:

• Failure of delivery, e.g. IV cannula failure during TIVA

• Inadequate anaesthesia to maintain unconsciousness. This may be

unintentional (e.g. not accounting for age-r elated changes in MAC

requirement) or intentional (e.g. purposefully reducing anaesthetic dose

during periods of cardiovascular instability).

The risks of AAGA can be reduced by monitoring the effects anaesthetic

drugs have on the brain or by monitoring anaesthetic drug concentrations.

Monitoring anaesthetic drug effects on the brain

Patient response to stimulation

A fully conscious patient is able to respond purposefully to verbal com-

mand or light tactile stimulation while maintaining a patent airway and SV.

Increasing anaesthetic depth leads to progressive unresponsiveness to ex-

ternal stimuli, beginning with loss of verbal contact.

• The patient is judged to be in a deep plane of anaesthesia sufficient for

surgery to commence when there is no response to sustained painful

stimuli. however, in the presence of NMB, it becomes impossible

to use this to distinguish an awake, paralysed patient from one who

is adequately anaesthetised. Autonomic signs of arousal such as

tachycardia, hypertension and lacrimation are unreliable indicators of

consciousness.

• Therefore, use of NMBAs is considered the most frequently implicated

risk factor for AGAA. Avoidance of pharmacological paralysis might be

the most effective method of prevention, but this may not be indicated

in all patients or possible for all surgery.

Processed EEG (pEEG) monitoring

The anaesthetised brain undergoes characteristic eeG changes, shifting

from a high- frequency, low- amplitude asynchronous signal to one that is

lower frequency, higher amplitude and more regular. This is followed by

burst suppression where episodes of electrical quiescence (suppression)

are interspersed with high- frequency, high- amplitude electrical activity

(bursts), and then finally a completely isoelectric eeG (Fig. 16.2).16

Unfortunately, raw data from multichannel eeG are too complex for the

anaesthetist to process in real time to guide anaesthesia titration, limiting

their applicability. In contrast, commercial peeG monitors, such as the

BIS®, Narcotrend® and e- entropy® monitors, use eeG data obtained from

forehead electrodes to generate a simplified, user-f riendly output (a cal-

culated dimensionless variable between 0 and 100), giving an indication

of the degree of cortical suppression (Table 16.10). This is done by using

algorithms derived from analysing eeG data of healthy volunteers with

known consciousness levels and exposed to known concentrations of

anaesthetic drugs.

## 頁面 448

DePTh OF ANAeSTheSIA MONITORING 427

Raw EEG

BIS

98 Awake

80 Sedation

60

Surgical

anaesthesia

40

Burst

20

suppression

0 Isoelectricity

Fig. 16.2 eeG changes and corresponding BIS values with increasing depth of

anaesthesia.

Table 16.10 Commonly used commercial peeG monitors

Device Main output and range Target range

BIS® BIS: 0 (almost flat eeG activity) to 100 40– 60

(awake)

Narcotrend® Narcotrend stage: stage A (awake) Stage e

to F (deep anaesthesia)

Narcotrend index: 0 (no detected

electrical activity) to 100 (awake)

e- entropy® Response entropy: 0 (suppressed 40– 60

eeG) to 100 (awake)

State entropy: 0 (suppressed eeG)

to 90 (awake)

SedLine® Patient State index (PSi): 0 25–50

(suppressed eeG) to 100 (awake)

## 頁面 449

428

428 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Limitations of pEEG monitors

• electromechanical interference can falsely elevate the displayed value.

This may be due to artefacts from electrical equipment used in the

vicinity of the peeG electrodes or signal contamination from facial

muscle activity. Studies have demonstrated a fall in BIS with onset of

muscle paralysis and a rise after reversal of blockade.

• Ketamine and NO do not produce the same pattern of eeG changes as

2

described above, making peeG monitors less useful when they are used

to supplement propofol or volatile anaesthesia.

• A 15– 30s time lag in the processing of raw eeG data means that the

monitors are only able to provide information about the conscious

state after it has arisen. Therefore, there is a risk of AAGA if a peeG

monitor is used reactively. Instead, anaesthesia should be deepened

in anticipation of an impending surgical stimulus before a rise in peeG

values has occurred.

Monitoring anaesthetic drug concentrations

End- tidal anaesthetic gas (ETAG) monitoring

eTAG monitoring provides a real-t ime display of volatile anaesthetic con-

centration in the brain as long as a state of equilibrium is reached between

the lungs (where the measurements take place), plasma and the brain (the

target end-o rgan). When the measured concentration is compared to the

MAC value of each agent, it gives an indication as to whether the dose de-

livered is adequate in achieving a certain clinical endpoint on a population

level. Incidence of AAGA is low when the measured concentration is above

0.7 age- adjusted MAC.

Limitations of ETAG monitoring

• Population- derived quantal dose– response relationships such as MAC

may not apply to individuals; thus, a 0.7 age-a djusted MAC may be an

underdose or an overdose for certain patient groups.

• Limited utility around the time of induction as equilibrium has yet been

achieved; therefore, measured eTAG concentrations do not accurately

represent concentrations in the brain.

Estimated plasma and effect site propofol concentrations

Point-o f- care blood propofol measurement is not currently widely available.

Instead, a TCI pump estimates plasma and effect site propofol concentra-

tions based on its algorithm and patient variables.

Limitations of estimating propofol concentrations

• The pump assumes successful IV delivery of propofol and would display

an adequate estimated brain propofol concentration, even when an IV

cannula has failed.

• Population- derived assumptions do not apply well to individuals at the

fringes of the pharmacokinetic models, e.g. the obese or elderly.

• Current pharmacokinetic models are not validated in pregnancy.

## 頁面 450

DePTh OF ANAeSTheSIA MONITORING 429

Evidence-b ased approach to the use of depth of anaesthesia

monitors

eTAG monitoring is simple, reliable and readily available. Its alarm should

be turned on and set to an age-a djusted MAC of >0.7 whenever a vola-

tile agent is used as the primary anaesthetic. Use of an additional peeG

monitor is unnecessary, even in high- risk patients, as prospective RCTs

(B- Unaware, BAG- ReCALL, MACS) have failed to demonstrate the su-

periority of a BIS- guided protocol in reducing AAGA, when compared to

eTAG monitoring.17,18,19

Processed eeG monitors should be used for patients receiving an NMBA

with TIVA or for those having TIVA who are at high risk of AAGA. The

B- Aware trial demonstrated that a BIS- guided protocol (aiming for a BIS of

between 40 and 60) reduces the risk of AAGA, compared to using clinical

signs alone.20

Processed eeG monitors may also have a role in:

• Titrating anaesthetic dose in those who are at risk of an underdose

(e.g. chronic substance misusers) or an overdose (e.g. frail patients) of

volatile anaesthesia when targeting an age-a djusted MAC of >0.7

• Titrating TIVA in patients outside of the demographic norms of the

pharmacokinetic models employed in TCI systems.

## 頁面 451

430

430 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Cardiac output monitoring

Accurate quantification of CO is an integral part of advanced haemo-

dynamic monitoring, which is a cornerstone in the management of high-

risk surgical and critically ill patients. Monitoring CO helps guide IV fluid

therapy and vasopressor and inotropic support, with the aim of improving

CO and O delivery to tissues. When incorporated into protocols with

2

target thresholds, they form the basis of GDFT.

Goal- directed fluid therapy

The fundamental principle of GDFT is to minimise complications associ-

ated with fluid imbalance perioperatively through optimisation of CO and

tissue perfusion. Parameters from CO monitors are used to help differen-

tiate fluid- responsive from non-fl uid- responsive patients. Fluid-r esponsive

patients are on the upward slope of the Frank–S tarling curve (Fig. 16.3),

with a fluid challenge resulting in an i stroke volume and CO. Repeated

fluid boluses may continue to improve the stroke volume. Once a patient

reaches the plateau on the Frank– Starling curve, there is no further im-

provement in stroke volume. Ongoing fluid administration will be ineffective

or even potentially harmful. In this setting, vasopressors may be employed

to support BP, or if CO remains low, this may be a situation suitable for

inotropic support.

Fluid-responsive

Fluid administration will

improve cardiac output

• The evidence supporting GDFT is conflicting. early studies showed

dramatic improvements in morbidity and mortality which led to rapid

uptake into clinical practice and incorporation into eRAS protocols.21

however, more recent large RCTs have failed to replicate many of

these findings. This is likely the result of widespread uptake of eRAS

and restrictive fluid strategies as a standard of care. Although GDFT

appears to be superior to traditional liberal or fixed volume approaches,

/emulov

ekortS

tuptuo

caidrac

Non-fluid-responsive

Fluid administration

ineffective or potentially

harmful

Preload

Fig. 16.3 Simplified explanation of the Frank– Starling law.

### 表格


| Fluid-responsive Fluid administration will improve cardiac output | Non-fluid-responsive Fluid administration ineffective or potentially harmful |
| --- | --- |



## 頁面 452

CARDIAC OUTPUT MONITORING 431

it seems to offer minimal additional benefit when compared to a

restrictive fluid strategy, especially if this is combined with eRAS.

• This is not to say GDFT is redundant. Literature has consistently

demonstrated a reduction in morbidity and hospital length of stay when

GDFT is applied to high- risk surgical patients.22 Further, following the

publication of the ReLIeF trial,23 overly restrictive fluid regimes may also

be harmful in higher- risk patients undergoing major abdominal surgery.

GDFT may therefore have greater benefit in high- risk patients and thus

should be reserved for this patient group.

Cardiac output monitors

There are numerous CO monitors available utilising various technologies,

which can lead to confusion when trying to differentiate among them.24

They can be invasive, minimally invasive or non-i nvasive. They can also be

calibrated or non- calibrated, with parameters being directly measured or

derived.

Invasive

Pulmonary artery flotation catheter

Regarded as the gold standard for measuring CO.

• Cold or room temperature 0.9% sodium chloride is injected into the

right atrium through the proximal port, with temperature change

measured in the PA using a thermistor close to the tip of the catheter.

CO and other parameters are then derived using the thermodilution

curve and the Stewart– hamilton equation.

• Newer devices can provide continuous CO by instead mildly heating

the blood and measuring the temperature change in the PA.

• Reliability of measurements can be affected by tricuspid incompetence,

shunts and misplacement of the catheter tip.

• Use has declined due to PA catheters being associated with i mortality

in ICU patients and the availability of less invasive monitors.

Minimally invasive

Arterial waveform analysis

These devices analyse the shape of the arterial waveform to calculate

stroke volume, CO and many other derived parameters. They are able

to provide continuous haemodynamic information, allowing for real-t ime

monitoring of fluid responsiveness.

• Accuracy is dependent on the consistency of the waveform and can be

affected by arrhythmias, rapid changes in haemodynamic stability, valve

insufficiency, aortic aneurysms and the use of an intra-a ortic balloon

pump (IABP).

• Non-calibrated devices use a sensor attached to a standard arterial

cannula. They cannot measure a true CO but derive this from the

arterial trace. As such, they provide less accurate absolute numbers,

compared to calibrated devices. however, they are still able to provide

useful numerical trend information which can guide therapy.

• Non-calibrated devices:

• ProAQT™— pulse contour analysis

• LiDCOrapid™— pulse power analysis

• Flotrac™ with eV1000™ or Vigileo™ monitors— pulse contour analysis.

## 頁面 453

432

432 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

• Calibrated devices utilise a 2nd technique intermittently to accurately

measure CO and then correlate this with the arterial trace to provide a

continuous CO. As such, they are resistant to changes in haemodynamic

stability and tend to provide more accurate absolute numbers. They

often require insertion of a central venous line and are therefore slightly

more invasive than non-calibrated devices.

• Calibrated devices:

• PiCCOplus™— pulse contour analysis calibrated with transpulmonary

thermodilution. Requires a thermistor- tipped arterial catheter and a

central venous line.

• LiDCOplus™— pulse power analysis calibrated with transpulmonary

lithium dilution. A lithium sensor attaches to a standard arterial

cannula. Lithium chloride is injected into either a central venous line

or peripheral cannula. Measurements are affected by concurrent

lithium treatment and high peak doses of NMBA. Contraindicated in

<40kg and 1st trimester of pregnancy.

• Volumeview™ with eV1000™ monitor— pulse contour analysis

calibrated with transpulmonary thermodilution. Requires a

thermistor- tipped catheter in the femoral artery and a central

venous line.

Doppler technology

• Oesophageal Doppler measures blood flow velocity in the descending

aorta and multiplies this by the estimated cross- sectional aortic area to

calculate stroke volume. Aortic diameter is estimated from a nomogram

or directly measured, depending on the device.

• Oesophageal Doppler- guided fluid management has been associated

with reduced hospital stay.

• Placement in patients at risk of oesophageal trauma or bleeding needs

special consideration.

• Inaccuracy of absolute values can be caused by epidural anaesthesia,

thoracic aortic aneurysms or morbid obesity, although trends and

dynamic parameters can still be used to guide fluid therapy.

Non- invasive

Vascular unloading technique

Also known as the finger volume clamp method. An infrared light source

and a sensor continuously measure blood volume in a finger. A finger pres-

sure cuff inflates and deflates to maintain a constant blood volume. This

fluctuation in cuff pressure produces a continuous BP waveform from which

haemodynamic variables can be derived. These are new to the market, with

limited validation studies.

Applied Fick principle

A rebreathing loop incorporating CO and airflow sensors is attached to

2

the ventilator circuit, allowing partial rebreathing of CO. Assuming CO

2 2

production, alveolar ventilation and CO remain unchanged over the re-

breathing cycle, CO can be calculated. Requires an intubated, sedated and

mechanically ventilated patient. It is unable to provide many of the useful

parameters other devices provide.

## 頁面 454

CARDIAC OUTPUT MONITORING 433

Bioimpedance/ bioreactance

Cyclical changes in blood flow within the thorax induce changes in impedance

to alternating electrical current, which can be measured using electrodes.

Newer devices use bioreactance, which is less susceptible to interference and

shows good correlation with pulmonary artery flotation catheters (PAFCs).

Parameters of volume responsiveness

Most CO monitors display a multitude of measured and derived haemo-

dynamic parameters. These can be either static or dynamic.

Static parameters

• These parameters include stroke volume, CO, CVP, pulmonary artery

occlusion pressure (PAOP), mixed venous O saturations, SVR, etc.

2

Unfortunately, the absolute values for these parameters fail to predict volume

responsiveness in the majority of patients. however, they can be reliably used

to observe trends and the effect of interventions such as fluid administration.

Dynamic parameters

• These include stroke volume variation (SVV) and pulse pressure variation

(PPV). Changes in intrathoracic pressure due to IPPV induce changes

in the stroke volume and pulse pressure as a result of a reduction in

preload. The greater the change in stroke volume or pressure, the

greater the likelihood that the patient is intravascularly deplete.

• Dynamic parameters are superior to static parameters when

determining volume responsiveness; however, the reliability of these

variables can be adversely affected by arrhythmias, right heart failure,

spontaneous breathing and V <8mL/ kg.

T

Fluid administration

The interpretation of data from CO monitoring should be made in light

of clinical examination and investigations such as serum lactate and base

deficit trends.

• When trying to optimise stroke volume, fluid is usually administered in boluses

over 5min, in volumes of around 3mL/k g (200–2 50mL) (Table 16.11).

• The response to a passive leg raise (or head- down position) is also

a reversible way to demonstrate whether the patient is likely to be

volume- responsive.

Table 16.11 Recommended thresholds for GDFT

Parameter Thresholds Intervention

recommended

Stroke volume (SV) SV increase >10% following Give further volume

200– 250mL fluid challenge challenge of 250mL

over 5– 10min

SV increase <10% following No further fluid. Continue

200– 250mL fluid challenge to monitor SV

over 5– 10min

SVV, PPV >12– 13% Give volume challenge of

250mL

Corrected flow time <0.35s Give volume challenge of

(FTc) (oesophageal 250mL

Doppler)

### 表格


| Table 16.11 Recommended thresholds for GDFT |
| --- |
| Parameter Thresholds Intervention recommended |
| Stroke volume (SV) SV increase >10% following Give further volume 200– 250mL fluid challenge challenge of 250mL over 5– 10min SV increase <10% following No further fluid. Continue 200– 250mL fluid challenge to monitor SV over 5– 10min SVV, PPV >12– 13% Give volume challenge of 250mL Corrected flow time <0.35s Give volume challenge of (FTc) (oesophageal 250mL Doppler) |



## 頁面 455

434

434 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Temperature control

Core body temperature in an awake patient is tightly controlled between

36.7°C and 37.1°C. Deviation above or below these temperatures causes

the hypothalamus to initiate behavioural and autonomic mechanisms to re-

store normothermia. This tight regulation is lost under GA and neuraxial

anaesthesia due to:

• Drug- induced vasodilation

• Abolition of behavioural responses to thermal discomfort and

• Resetting of the threshold temperatures in which autonomic responses

are activated, resulting in a widened range.

The anaesthetised patient is prone to hypothermia (defined as core body

temperature <36°C). This typically occurs in a triphasic pattern.

Phase 1

Rapid loss of 71°C within the first 30– 45min of anaesthesia due to heat re-

distribution from the core compartment to the peripheries.

Phase 2

Loss of 71°C over 2– 3h from radiation (40%), convection (30%), evapor-

ation (25%) and conduction (5%).

Phase 3

A plateau occurs when heat loss is finally matched by heat production as

maximal vasoconstriction is activated.

hypothermia in the perioperative period is not benign. Adverse conse-

quences include:

• Coagulopathy and an i need for transfusion

• i risk of surgical site infection

• i rate of MACe

• Reduced rate of drug metabolism (e.g. prolonged NMB and delayed

emergence from anaesthesia).

Measures to reduce the risk of perioperative hypothermia include:

• Identifing high- risk patients (high ASA grade, low BMI, undergoing major

surgery and using a combined general/ neuraxial technique) and treating

hypothermia before commencing anaesthesia

• Monitoring core body temperature (distal oesophagus, nasopharynx,

tympanic membrane or bladder) at 30min intervals

• Maintaining ambient temperature in preop areas and operating theatres,

prewarming fluids to 37°C for IV administration or internal irrigation

and humidifying respiratory gases using an hMe filter

• Active cutaneous warming, most commonly achieved using a forced

air device, which should be used for all procedures with anaesthesia

time >30min

• Active internal warming techniques, such as CPB and peritoneal

lavage, are invasive and therefore are not indicated for most routine

operations.

## 頁面 456

PATIeNT POSITIONING FOR SURGeR y 435

Patient positioning for surgery

Positioning patients for surgery is a compromise between optimising sur-

gical access and limiting patient harm from its deleterious effects.

Supine position

The supine position provides good operative access for many procedures.

One or both arms may be abducted out on padded arm boards or tucked

in next to the patient’s body using lift sheets (Fig. 16.4).

Physiological changes

• Reduced FRC due to cranial displacement of the diaphragm when lying

supine, compounded by the loss of diaphragmatic tone after induction

of anaesthesia. This can be mitigated by the use of PeeP or a slight

head- up tilt.

• Aortocaval compression. This can occur in advanced stages of

pregnancy leading to hypotension. It may be alleviated by a slight

leftward bed tilt or by using a wedge under the right hip.

Potential complications associated with supine positioning

• The arms should be abducted <90° to avoid stretch injury to the

brachial plexus; the forearm should be neutral or in supination to

minimise pressure on the ulnar nerve. When adducted, the arm should

be in a neutral position, with the palm facing the patient.

• Back strain— this can be reduced by placing a pillow under the knees to

restore the normal lumbar lordotic curve.

• Pressure injuries to the occiput, sacrum and heels can occur after

prolonged contact with the operating table. Intermittent repositioning

of the head and the use of gel heel pads and gel mattress help reduce

this risk by pressure redistribution.

Fig. 16.4 Supine position. Image courtesy of Medical photography, Waikato District

health Board.

## 頁面 457

436

436 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Trendelenburg (head- down) position

Trendelenburg positioning requires the supine patient to be tilted head

down, improving access to pelvic organs. The patient is secured using a

variety of devices, including slip-r esistant table padding, straps and vacuum

bean bag supports. The arms may be abducted and secured onto arm

boards or, more commonly, adducted and tucked in by the side.

Complications associated with Trendelenburg position

• Increase in venous return and central blood volume (effect increases

with degree of tilt). May compromise patients with cardiac disease.

• Reduced FRC and lung compliance, leading to impaired ventilation and

atelectasis.

• Venous congestion leading to raised ICP and IOP and the potential for

airway oedema after a long case.

• Patients may slide on the table, resulting in pressure areas, inadvertent

endobronchial intubation, traction on lines and tubes or limbs falling

from the table.

• Passive regurgitation of gastric contents is more likely.

Reverse Trendelenburg position

With reverse Trendelenburg positioning, the supine patient is tilted head up

to improve access for open or laparoscopic upper abdominal surgery. The

patient is secured onto the operating table, as described previously, with

the addition of a padded foot board if necessary.

Venous pooling in the lower extremities is the most significant adverse

physiological change. This leads to a reduction in venous return, CO and

BP. Increasing the angle of tilt and a diminished cardiac reserve exaggerate

the magnitude of these changes. Implementing a gradual, incremental head

elevation, giving IV fluids together with a vasopressor and applying com-

pression stockings may mitigate these effects.

Potential complications are similar to those described above, except that

the risk for passive regurgitation is not elevated.

Lithotomy and Lloyd- Davies positions

With lithotomy positioning, the supine patient’s legs are separated, with

the hips and knees flexed to a variable degree and supported using stirrups

or slings (Fig. 16.5). This is often used in combination with a degree of

Trendelenburg to provide access for urological, gynaecological and rectal

procedures. In hip fracture surgery, a hemilithotomy position may be used

where the operative leg is placed in traction and the non-o perative leg in a

lithotomy stirrup.

The Lloyd- Davies position is similar to lithotomy, with the hips and knees

flexed to a much lesser extent (Fig. 16.6).

Adverse physiological effects occur as a result of a rise in abdominal pres-

sure, which can in turn obstruct venous return (leading to hypotension),

reduce lung compliance and impair ventilation.

Potential complications associated with lithotomy positioning

• Crush injury to the hand of the adducted arm is possible when the

stirrup is being adjusted or when the foot section of the operating table

is reattached. It is thus imperative to confirm that the hands are in a safe

position before these actions are carried out.

## 頁面 458

PATIeNT POSITIONING FOR SURGeR y 437

Fig. 16.5 Lithotomy position. Image courtesy of Medical photography, Waikato District

health Board.

Fig. 16.6 Lloyd- Davies position. Image courtesy of Medical photography, Waikato District

health Board.

• The peroneal nerve is at risk of compression injury against the fibular

head in the stirrup, and the sciatic nerve is at risk of stretch injury from

prolonged, extreme hip flexion.

• Compartment syndrome is possible for surgery lasting longer than

2– 3h in the lithotomy position.25 Legs should therefore be elevated to

the least possible extent for the shortest amount of time. Concurrent

Trendelenburg positioning, intraoperative hypotension and the use of a

sequential compression device on the calves have also been implicated

and should either be minimised or avoided.

## 頁面 459

438

438 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Lateral decubitus position

The lateral decubitus position allows access to the non- dependent side for

operations such as hip arthroplasty. Flexion is often added just beneath

the iliac crest to increase exposure for operations such as nephrectomy

or thoracotomy.

The torso is kept in place using a vacuum bean bag or pelvic and lumbar

supports. The head should be kept neutral using pillows (check lower

ear is not folded and eyes not pressed upon). The dependent arm rests

on a padded arm board, with a roll placed between the chest wall and

the operating table to alleviate pressure on axillary structures. The non-

dependent arm is secured on an arm support. Legs are placed in slight

flexion, with a pillow between the knees (Fig. 16.7).

Fig. 16.7 Lateral decubitus position. Image courtesy of Medical photography, Waikato

District health Board.

Physiological changes include

• Venous pooling in the dependent leg leads to reduced venous return,

CO and MAP. This is exacerbated by concurrent lateral flexion at the

hips, especially if the IVC becomes obstructed.

• Increase in V/ Q mismatch in mechanically ventilated patients due to

preferential perfusion in the dependent lung and preferential ventilation

in the non- dependent lung. This can result in hypoxaemia.

Potential complications associated with lateral decubitus positioning

• The brachial plexus in the dependent arm is at risk of compression

injury in the axilla; the chest should therefore be supported with a roll

caudal to this point or by using a bean bag with its upper edge aligned

below the level of the axilla.

• The brachial plexus in the non- dependent arm is at risk of stretch injury

if patient’s neck is flexed laterally downwards or if the arm is placed in

## 頁面 460

PATIeNT POSITIONING FOR SURGeR y 439

forward flexion >90°, as is often required in thoracic surgery. The head

should therefore be supported in a neutral position throughout the

operation and the extent and duration of forward arm flexion should be

discussed with the surgeon.

• The peroneal nerve in the dependent leg is at risk of compression

against the fibular head and the operating table; adequate padding is

essential.

Prone position

The prone position is used for the posterior approach to the spine, super-

ficial procedures on the back, surgery on posterior extremities and rectal

and buttock procedures.

Patients are usually anaesthetised and intubated in the supine position

before being turned prone onto the operating table. The head is rested on

a foam or gel head rest or held in skull pins using a Mayfield clamp system.

The torso is supported using firm rolls or bolsters under the chest and

pelvis, taking care not to compress the abdomen. More commonly for

spinal surgery, a dedicated torso support system such as the Wilson frame

or a specialised Jackson table is used. Arms are placed on arm boards in the

‘surrender’ position— the shoulders in slight forward flexion and abduction,

the elbows flexed and the hands up. Arms are tucked in by the side if there

is limited range of motion in the upper extremities. The hips and knees are

flexed, with the feet resting on a pillow (Fig. 16.8).

Fig. 16.8 Prone position. Image courtesy of Medical photography, Waikato District

health Board.

## 頁面 461

440

440 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Complications of abdominal compression

• Caval compression leads to a reduction in venous return, CO and MAP.

It also increases the risk of epidural venous plexus bleeding during spine

surgery.

• Cranial displacement of the diaphragm leading to reduced compliance

and impaired ventilation.

Complications associated with prone positioning

• Injuries can occur while turning an anaesthetised patient prone. This has to

be done in a coordinated fashion by staff familiar with the process. Tubes,

lines and catheters need to be secured to prevent dislodgement. Monitoring

cables should be minimised or removed completely to avoid entanglement.

• Neurovascular compromise can occur in the upper extremities due

to axillary compression or stretch injury from overabduction and

overextension of the shoulders.

• Prone spinal surgery is associated with ischaemic optic neuropathy,

resulting in permanent vision loss. Risk factors include prolonged

multilevel surgery and large volume blood loss. The use of the Wilson

frame has also been implicated, potentially because it positions the head

below the level of the heart.26 Measures to reduce this risk include:

staging complex spinal surgery; avoiding hypotension; large-v olume

crystalloid fluid administration; and keeping the head neutral at, or

above, the level of the heart.

Sitting position

Surgery on structures in the posterior fossa of the cranium or on the

shoulder often requires the patient to be in the sitting position. Measures to

ensure safety in this position include:27

• Fixing the head in skull pins for neurosurgery or supporting it between a

headrest and a padded face mask for shoulder surgery.

• ensuring the buttocks are firmly against the operating table and aligned

with the break of the bed. A safety strap across the lap and pillows

under the legs prevent the patient from sliding caudally.

• Placing adducted arms on padded armrests adds lateral stability. For

shoulder surgery, the operative arm can be secured to a commercial

arm- holding device or rested freely on a padded Mayo stand (Fig. 16.9).

Physiological changes associated with the sitting position are similar to those

already outlined for the reverse Trendelenburg position.

Complications associated with sitting position

• CVe. The sitting position is associated with a drop in cerebral perfusion

pressure, potentially resulting in ischaemia. Maintaining O delivery is

2

essential. This can be achieved by having:

• Adequate pressure. Set a MAP target around the patient’s baseline

(or at least 70mmhg for an otherwise healthy patient) and maintain

this with vasopressors and IV fluids. The table should be raised in

a gradual, incremental manner to allow time for treatment to be

instituted. ensure measurements reflect pressure in the cerebral

circulation by zeroing the arterial line transducer at the level of the

external auditory meatus. If NIBP monitoring is used, the hydrostatic

pressure difference between the level of the cuff and the brain should

be accounted for and the MAP target adjusted accordingly (1mmhg

for every 1.25cm difference in height).

## 頁面 462

PATIeNT POSITIONING FOR SURGeR y 441

Fig. 16.9 Sitting position. Image courtesy of Medical photography, Waikato District

health Board.

• Adequate flow. The position of the head and neck should be

anatomical to ensure that neck vessels are not occluded. Avoid

hypocapnia which induces cerebral vasoconstriction.

• Adequate O content. Avoid anaemia and hypoxaemia.

2

• Use of IV sedation and interscalene regional anaesthesia rather than

GA with IPPV has been shown to be associated with less hypotensive

episodes for shoulder surgery in the sitting position and may be the

preferred technique in higher- risk patients.

• Venous air embolism (VAe). This is possible during posterior fossa

craniotomy because the operative site is above the level of the heart

and injury to dural venous sinuses simultaneously creates a pressure

gradient and a portal of entry for air entrainment.

• Pressure injuries at the elbow and over the ischial tuberosity, resulting in

ulnar and sciatic nerve compression respectively.

Further reading

Welch MB (2019). Patient positioning for surgery and anesthesia in adults. [In

UpToDate database on the Internet] M https:// www.uptodate.com/ contents/

patient- positioning- for- surgery- and- anesthesia- in- adults

## 頁面 463

442

442 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Postoperative nausea and vomiting

(See also % p. 925.) Nausea is the unpleasant sensation of the need to

vomit. Vomiting is the forced expulsion of upper GI contents via the mouth.

• PONV refers to nausea or vomiting occurring during the first 24–4 8h

after surgery. The incidence is around 30% in adults and 42% in children,

rising to 80% in unmedicated high- risk patients.

• Post- discharge nausea and vomiting refers to PONV experienced after

discharge from recovery. The incidence is about 37%.

Consequences of PONV

• Patient morbidity: wound dehiscence, bleeding, pulmonary aspiration,

oesophageal rupture, fluid and electrolyte disturbances, d patient

satisfaction.

• i health care costs: prolonged stay in post- anaesthesia care unit,

delayed hospital discharge, unanticipated hospital admission,

readmission to hospital post-d ischarge.

Neural pathways for nausea and vomiting

Afferent inputs arise via the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ; also known

as the area postrema), the GI tract via the vagus nerve, the vestibular

system and the cerebral cortex.

• The CTZ is a circumventricular organ located on the dorsal surface of

the medulla, on the floor of the 4th ventricle. It lacks the characteristic

endothelial tight junctions of the blood– brain barrier, allowing

communication between the CSF and blood.

• The vomiting centre/ ‘central pattern generator for vomiting’ is the

integration of these inputs into a final common pathway and is located

in the medulla.

The nucleus tractus solitarius triggers vomiting by stimulating the rostral

nucleus, nucleus ambiguus, ventral respiratory group and dorsal motor nu-

cleus of the vagus.

• Vomiting is preceded by characteristic autonomic changes (salivation,

sweating, hypertension, tachycardia, cutaneous vasoconstriction) and

subsequent coordinated contraction of the diaphragm and abdominal

muscles to expel gastric contents.

The following receptors are involved: histaminergic (h), dopaminergic

1

(D), serotonergic (5- hT), muscarinic and neurokinin (NK- 1).

2 3

Risk factors for PONV

Patient factors

• ♀ gender (3× risk)

• Previous PONV or motion sickness (2– 3× risk)

• Non- smokers (2× risk)

• Age <50y (2× risk).

Note: ASA status, BMI, menstrual cycle phase, perioperative fasting status

and preoperative anxiety have no proven association with PONV.

## 頁面 464

POSTOPeRATIVe NAUSeA AND VOMITING 443

Anaesthetic factors

• Use of volatile anaesthesia (2× risk). Note this risk increases in a dose-

dependent manner and risk peaks in the first 2– 6h following surgery

• Duration of anaesthesia (1.5× risk if exceeding 90min)

• Postoperative opioid use (1.5× risk). Note that this is independent of

the opioid administered

• Use of NO (1.5× risk).

2

Note: NGT placement, muscle relaxant reversal and use of supplemental

O have no proven association with PONV.

2

Surgical factors

• Laparoscopic surgery, gynaecological surgery and cholecystectomy.

Note: head and neck, breast, abdominal, posterior cranial fossa and oph-

thalmic surgery are all associated with i PONV but have not been proven

to be independent risk factors.

Simplified risk scores for predicting PONV

• The Apfel PONV risk score assesses four domains: ♀ gender, history

of PONV and/o r motion sickness, non-s moking status and predicted

postoperative use of opioids. When zero, one, two, three or four factors

are present, the risk of PONV is 10%, 20%, 40%, 60% and 80%, respectively.

• The Koivuranta PONV risk score assesses five domains: ♀ gender,

non- smoking status, history of PONV, history of motion sickness and

duration of surgery >60min. If zero, one, two, three, four or five risk

factors are present, the incidence of PONV is 17%, 18%, 43%, 54%,

74% and 87%, respectively.

• The POVOC PONV risk score for paediatric patients assesses five

domains: duration of surgery ≥30min, age ≥3y, strabismus surgery and

history of PONV in the child or of PONV in his/ her relatives. When

zero, one, two, three or four risk factors are present, the incidence is

9%, 10%, 30%, 55% and 70%, respectively.

• The Apfel PDNV score assesses five domains: ♀ gender, age <50y,

history of PONV, opioid use in the post- anaesthesia care unit and

nausea in the post- anaesthesia care unit. When zero, one, two, three,

four or five factors are present, the risk of PONV is 10%, 20%, 30%,

50%, 60% and 80%, respectively.

Prevention and prophylaxis

Risk assessment

• If low risk (0– 1 risk factors), consider no prophylaxis.

• If moderate risk (2– 3 risk factors), consider 1– 2 interventions.

• If high risk (4+ risk factors), consider >2 interventions, including

regional anaesthesia.

Methods to reduce PONV

• Prophylactic antiemetic administration (Table 16.12).

• Avoid GA and opioids by using LA or regional anaesthesia (9×

reduced risk).

• Avoid volatile and NO by using propofol for induction and maintenance

2

(number needed to treat (NNT) = 5).

• Use multimodal analgesia to reduce opioid requirement.

Non-p harmacological methods to reduce PONV include adequate hydra-

tion, and acupuncture at P6 point, on the volar wrist (NNT = 5).

## 頁面 465

444

444 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

VNOP

fo

tnemtaert

dna

sixalyhporp

rof elbaliava

sgurD

21.61

elbaT

setoN

TNN

esoD

msinahceM

noitnevretnI

enil

tsriF

.nortesnadno

fo

gm4

dna lodirepord

fo

gm52.1

ot tceffe

ni lauqe

gm4

4

ta

VI

gm8

–4

dioretS

enosahtemaxeD

dnuow

fo ksir

esaercni

ton

seoD

.esu

dioipo

evitarepotsop

secudeR

noitcudni

stneitap

citebaid

ni

sgnidaer

esoculg

doolb

ni ytilibal

esuac

yam ,noitcefni

ylno

esod

elgniS

lavretni

)cTQ(

TQ detcerroc

no tceffe

ralimiS

.edimarpolcotem

ot roirepuS

5

ta

VI

gm52.1

–526.0

enonehporytuB

lodireporD

rehtruf

yltnacfiingis

ton

seod

,rehtegot

desu

nehw

,revewoh

;nortesnadno

ot

noitcudni

tsinogatna

D 2

citemeitna

ralimis

sah

)gm2<(

sesod

wol

ta lodirepolah

.cTQ esaercni

h8Q

dna

)SPe(

sngis

ladimarypartxe

,yteixna

,noitades

esuac

yaM .ycacffie sTFL lamronba

ot

ytivitca

ralimiS

.nortesonolap

dna

tnatiperpa

naht

evitceffe

sseL

6

fo

dne

ta

VI

gm8

–4

tsinogatna

Th5

nortesnadnO

3

era

ehcadaeh

dna

noitapitsnoC

.nortesalod

dna

nortesiport

,nortesinarg

yregrus

sTFL

detavele

esuac

yaM .nommoc

h6Q

enil

dnoceS

ylevitarepotsop

h84 dna

42

ta nortesnadno

naht

evitceffe

eroM

.efi l-flah

h04

4

gm08

–04

fo

esod

elgniS

tsinogatna

1 -KN

tnatiperpA

noitcudnierp

OP

yrd

,noitades

esuac

yaM

.ytivitca

cigrenilohcitna

aiv

Rh

ni

esaercni

llamS

01

VI

gm05

–52

tsinogatna

h

enizilcyC

1

noitcejni

no

lufniaP

.noisiv

derrulb

dna htuom

h8Q

ciniracsumitnA

hDA

.diolloc

ro

diollatsyrc

neewteb

ecnereffid

oN

.VI

gk /Lm01

ot roirepuS

ksir

-hgih

ni5

VI

gk

/Lm03

fo noisserppuS

diufl

VI

gnitimov

dna

aesuan

htiw

detaicossa

esaeler

stneitap

esaeler

hDA

## 頁面 466

POSTOPeRATIVe NAUSeA AND VOMITING 445

setoN

TNN

esoD

msinahceM

noitnevretnI

,noitagnolorp

cTQ

,noisnetopyh

citatsohtro

,gnipmarc

lanimodba

,SPe

gm01

rof

03

VI

gm02 –01

edimazneB

edimarpolcoteM

aimeanitcalorprepyh

,noitades

gm52

rof

61

h8Q

tsinogatna

D 2

demerp

a

sa

naht

yregrus

fo

dne

ot

roirp

nim03

evitceffe

eroM

6

ot

roirp

nim03

VI gm2

enipezaidozneB

malozadiM

yregrus

fo dne

,noitades

,noitagnolorp

cTQ

,noisnetopyh

citatsohtro

,SPe

VI

gm02

–5

enizaihtonehP

enizareprolhcorP

aimeanitcalorprepyh

MI

gm5.21

tsinogatna

D 2

h6Q

llams

fo

tceffe

citemeitnA

.tnemnorivne

derotinom

a

ni

retsinimda

ylnO

5

AVIT

nwonknU

lofoporP

feirb

ylekil

sesulob

sesulob

VI gm02

rof

NRP

tnemtaert

dna

htuom

yrd

,ecnabrutsid

lausiv

esuac

yaM

.tceffe

fo

tesno

rof

h4

–2

6

lamredsnart

gm5.1

cigrenilohcitnA

enimalopocS

stneitap

ylredle

ni

stceffe

SNC

.ssenizzid

gnineve

eht

morf

hctap

enicsoyh(

erofeb

h2

ot

pu roirp

)edimorbordyh

noitcudni

## 頁面 467

446

446 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

Treatment principles

Using combination therapy with drugs targeting different receptor classes is

the most effective strategy due to their additive effect.

• Ondansetron, dexamethasone and droperidol are the most studied and

are widely considered to be 1st-l ine antiemetics in both the prophylaxis

and treatment of nausea and vomiting.

• In the context of failed prophylaxis, repeating doses of prophylactic

antiemetics already administered is of no benefit. Choose a drug from

another class.

## 頁面 468

POSTOPeRATIVe NAUSeA AND VOMITING 447

Further reading

Gan TJ, Diemunsch P, habib AS, et al. (2014). Consensus guidelines for the management of

postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg, 118, 85– 113.

Apfel CC, Meyer A, Orhan- Sungur M, Jalota L, Whelan RP, Jukar- Rao S (2012). Supplemental intra-

venous crystalloids for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting: quantitative review.

Br J Anaesth, 108, 893– 902.

Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, et al. (2012). Who is at risk for postdischarge nausea and

vomiting after ambulatory surgery? Anesthesiology, 117, 475– 86.

Lee A, Fan LT (2009). Stimulation of the wrist acupuncture point P6 for preventing postoperative

nausea and vomiting. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2, CD003281.

Apfel CC, Kranke P, eberhardt Lh, Roos A, Roewer N (2002). Comparison of predictive models for

postoperative nausea and vomiting. Br J Anaesth, 88, 234– 40.

References

1 Cook T, Woodall N, Frerk C (eds); 4th National Audit Project of The Royal College of

Anaesthetists and the Difficult Airway Society (2011). Major complications of airway manage-

ment in the United Kingdom. London: Royal College of Anaesthetists.

2 Campbell M, Pierce JMT (2015). Atmospheric science, anaesthesia, and the environment. BJA

Educ, 15, 173– 9. doi:10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mku033

3 The Lancet, health and Climate Change Commission. Countdown on health and climate change.

M https:// www.thelancet.com/ commissions/ climate- change

4 National health Service. NHS Long Term Plan 2019. M https:// www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/

online- version/ appendix/ health- and- the- environment/

5 Kuvadia M, Cummis Ce, Liguori G, et al. (2020). ‘Green- gional’ anesthesia: the non- polluting

benefits of regional anesthesia to decrease greenhouse gases and attenuate climate change. Reg

Anesth Pain Med, 45, 744– 5.

6 Sherman J, Le C, Lamers V, eckelman M (2012). Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of anesthetic

drugs. Anesth Analg, 114, 1086– 90.

7 NhS Sustainable Development Unit (2018). Reducing the use of natural resources in health and

social care, 2018 report. M https:// www.sduhealth.org.uk/ policy- strategy/ reporting/ natural-

resource- footprint- 2018.aspx

8 McGain F, Muret J, Lawson C, Sherman F (2020). environmental sustainability within anaesthesia

and critical care. Br J Anaesth, 125, 680– 92.

9 Lin T, Smith T, Pinnock C (eds) (2016). Fundamentals of Anaesthesia, 4th edn. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press. M https:// www.cambridge.org/ core/ books/ fundamentals- of-

anaesthesia/ 5BB9DCFBF693F77e4B21e5e37CD81B52

10 harper NJN, Cook TM, Garcez T, et al. (2018). Anaesthesia, surgery, and life-t hreatening allergic

reactions: epidemiology and clinical features of perioperative anaphylaxis in the 6th National

Audit Project (NAP6). Br J Anaesth, 121, 159– 71.

11 Sadleir PhM, Clarke RC, Bunning DL, Platt PR (2013). Anaphylaxis to neuromuscular blocking

drugs: incidence and cross- reactivity in Western Australia from 2002 to 2011. Br J Anaesth,

110, 981– 7.

12 Ortega R, Brull SJ, Prielipp R, Gutierrez A, De La Cruz R, Conley CM (2018). Monitoring neuro-

muscular function. N Engl J Med, 378, e6.

13 Naguib M, Brull SJ, Johnson KB (2017). Conceptual and technical insights into the basis of neuro-

muscular monitoring. Anaesthesia, 72(S1), 16– 37.

14 Mashour GA, Avidan MS (2015). Intraoperative awareness: controversies and non- controversies.

Br J Anaesth, 115 Suppl 1, i20– 6.

15 Pandit JJ, Andrade J, Bogod DG, et al. (2014). 5th National Audit Project (NAP5) on accidental

awareness during general anaesthesia: summary of main findings and risk factors. Br J Anaesth,

113, 549– 59.

16 Wildes TS, Winter AC, Maybrier hR, et al. (2016). Protocol for the electroencephalography

Guidance of Anesthesia to Alleviate Geriatric Syndromes (eNGAGeS) study: a pragmatic,

randomised clinical trial. BMJ Open, 6, e011505. M https:// bmjopen.bmj.com/ content/ 6/ 6/

e011505

17 Avidan MS, Jacobsohn e, Glick D, et al. (2011). Prevention of intraoperative awareness in a high-

risk surgical population. N Engl J Med, 365, 591– 600.

18 Avidan MS, Zhang L, Burnside BA, et al. (2008). Anesthesia awareness and the bispectral index.

N Engl J Med, 358, 1097– 108.

19 Mashour GA, Shanks A, Tremper KK, et al. (2012). Prevention of intraoperative awareness with

explicit recall in an unselected surgical population: a randomized comparative effectiveness trial.

Anesthesiology, 117, 717– 25.

## 頁面 469

448

448 ChAPTeR 16 Conduct of anaesthesia

20 Myles PS, Leslie K, McNeil J, Forbes A, Chan MTV (2004). Bispectral index monitoring to prevent

awareness during anaesthesia: the B- Aware randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 363, 1757– 63.

21 Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, hubner M, et al. (2019). Guidelines for perioperative care in elective

colorectal surgery: enhanced Recovery After Surgery (eRAS®) Society recommendations: 2018.

World J Surg, 43, 659.

22 Watson X, Cecconi M (2017). haemodynamic monitoring in the peri-o perative period: the past,

the present and the future. Anaesthesia, 72, 7– 15.

23 Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, et al. (2018). Restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major

abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med, 378, 2263– 74.

24 Kobe J, Mishra N, Arya VK, Al-Moustadi W, Nates W, Kumar B (2019). Cardiac output moni-

toring: technology and choice. Ann Card Anaesth, 22, 6– 17.

25 Stornelli N, Wydra FB, Mitchell JJ, Stahel PF, Fabbri S (2016). The dangers of lithotomy posi-

tioning in the operating room: case report of bilateral lower extremity compartment syndrome

after a 90- minutes surgical procedure. Patient Saf Surg, 10, 18.

26 [No authors listed] (2019). Practice advisory for perioperative visual loss associated with spine

surgery 2019: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on

Perioperative Visual Loss, the North American Neuro- Ophthalmology Society, and the Society

for Neuroscience in Anesthesiology and Critical Care. Anesthesiology, 130, 12– 30.

27 higgins JD, Frank RM, hamamoto JT, Provencher MT, Romeo AA, Verma NN (2017). Shoulder

arthroscopy in the beach chair position. Arthrosc Tech, 6, e1153– 8.

