# Chapter 17: Blood products and fluid therapy

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 470-491*

---

## 頁面 470

Chapter 17 444499

Blood products and fluid

therapy

Nicholas Eaddy and Alexandra Cardinal

Blood products 450

Patient blood management 458

Massive transfusion 460

Jehovah’s Witnesses 462

Fluid therapy 464

## 頁面 471

450

450 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Blood products

the goal of transfusion is to efficiently correct tissue hypoperfusion,

coagulopathy or anaemic hypoxaemia, while minimising the risk of

transfusion- related adverse outcomes for patients. Blood products are

largely obtained through voluntary donation prior to undergoing expensive

and labour-i ntensive processing, storage and dispensing. Consideration of

both the intrinsic and financial values of blood products is appropriate. In

this spirit, we aim to give the right blood products to the right patients at

the right time in the right amount.

Donation and testing

Whole blood donation

each donor provides 500mL of blood. a total of 470mL goes on to be pro-

cessed while 30mL is utilised for routine testing. Donors can typically give

blood four times annually.1

Apheresis donation

a cell separator is used to collect plasma, platelets, white cells or haemato-

poietic progenitor cells. Donor red cells are returned to the donor. Donors

may give these fractions every 2w.1

Testing

Donated blood is tested for aBO/r hesus D (rhD) blood groups and

screened for infectious diseases (hIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human t

cell lymphotropic virus (htLV)-1 / 2 and syphilis). Donations at risk of mal-

aria or Chagas disease are tested for Plasmodium and Trypanosoma cruzi.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) antibody- negative components derived from CMV

antibody- negative donors are available for immunosuppressed patients and

neonates.

Blood processing

Whole blood is a heterogeneous suspension of cellular and protein elem-

ents in plasma. Donated blood is usually processed into a range of blood

components and fractionated products (table 17.1).2 In low- and middle-

income countries, and in military surgery, whole blood is often used.

Prestorage leucodepletion

Filtration reduces the risk of bloodborne infections such as htLV-1 / 2 and

CMV. Leucodepletion may also prevent alloimmunisation, febrile reactions

and transfusion- related acute lung injury (traLI).

Centrifugation and cryoprecipitation

Separates red cells, platelets, plasma and protein components.

Irradiation

Gamma or X- ray irradiation eliminates lymphocytes for patients at risk of

transfusion- associated graft- versus- host disease (ta- GvhD).

Viral inactivation

Plasma- derived products (e.g. FFP and cryoprecipitate) to be used in those

born after 1996 in the UK are sourced from outside the UK and have under-

gone viral inactivation with either solvent detergent or methylene blue.2

## 頁面 472

BLOOD PrODUCtS 451

Table 17.1 Comparison of blood components

Packed red Platelets FFP Cryoprecipitate

blood cells

(PRBCs)

Derivation Centrifuged Pooled buffy apheresis Controlled

from single- coat from donation from thawing of

donor whole centrifugation a ♂ donor. single- donor

blood from 4– 6 rapidly frozen FFP. Pooled from

whole blood within 8h of 4– 6 donors

donations or donation

by apheresis

from a single

donor

Composition hct 50– 70% >240 × 109 0.5g fibrinogen, 2g fibrinogen,

suspended in platelets factor VII vWF, factor

SaGM* >0.7IU/ mL, VIII, factor XIII,

labile factors fibronectin,

factor VII

>1.5IU/ mL

Volume 300mL 300mL 300mL Pooled

100– 200mL

Storage 2– 6°C 20– 24°C on – 30°C – 30°C

an agitator

Shelf- life 35d 7d 2y (frozen) 2y (frozen)

4h (thawed 4h (thawed

2– 6°C) room temp)

Dose 4mL/ kg will 1 unit will 10– 15mL/ kg 1 unit per 30kg

increase hb increase body weight to

by 10g/ L platelet count increase plasma

by 20– 40 × fibrinogen by

109/ L 1.0g/ L

* Sodium chloride 0.9%, adenine, glucose and mannitol.

Other derived products

• Fibrinogen concentrate is a freeze- dried powder containing 1g of

purified human fibrinogen which has undergone pasteurisation and

sterile filtration. Stored at room temperature for up to 30mo, it

is reconstituted and raises a patient’s fibrinogen by 70.25g/ L. No

thawing or blood type matching is required. Indicated for use in

hypofibrinogenaemia, cardiac surgery, obstetric bleeding and major

trauma.1,3

• Recombinant factor VIIa is a freeze- dried powder used in patients

with congenital factor VII deficiency, in bleeding episodes in patients

with haemophilia a or B, with inhibitors to factors VIII or IX, and

occasionally in those with severe uncontrolled bleeding as part of a

massive transfusion. Dosing should be discussed with a haematologist

(see % p. 282).1

### 表格


| Table 17.1 Comparison of blood components |
| --- |
| Packed red Platelets FFP Cryoprecipitate blood cells (PRBCs) |
| Derivation Centrifuged Pooled buffy apheresis Controlled from single- coat from donation from thawing of donor whole centrifugation a ♂ donor. single- donor blood from 4– 6 rapidly frozen FFP. Pooled from whole blood within 8h of 4– 6 donors donations or donation by apheresis from a single donor Composition hct 50– 70% >240 × 109 0.5g fibrinogen, 2g fibrinogen, suspended in platelets factor VII vWF, factor SaGM* >0.7IU/ mL, VIII, factor XIII, labile factors fibronectin, factor VII >1.5IU/ mL Volume 300mL 300mL 300mL Pooled 100– 200mL Storage 2– 6°C 20– 24°C on – 30°C – 30°C an agitator Shelf- life 35d 7d 2y (frozen) 2y (frozen) 4h (thawed 4h (thawed 2– 6°C) room temp) Dose 4mL/ kg will 1 unit will 10– 15mL/ kg 1 unit per 30kg increase hb increase body weight to by 10g/ L platelet count increase plasma by 20– 40 × fibrinogen by 109/ L 1.0g/ L |
| * Sodium chloride 0.9%, adenine, glucose and mannitol. |



## 頁面 473

452

452 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

• Prothrombin complex concentrate (e.g. Prothrombinex®) is a sterile,

freeze-d ried powder for reconstitution containing 500IU of purified

human factors II, IX and X. It also contains small amounts of factors V

and VII, 25IU of antithrombin III and 200IU of heparin. Used to replace

congenital factor deficiencies when purified single-f actor concentrates

are unavailable, or for the reversal of vitamin K antagonist anticoagulants

(e.g. warfarin). It does not need to be X-matched or thawed. Dosing is

dependent on coagulation studies, desired clotting profile, patient weight

and the factor deficiency being reversed.1

• Individual factor concentrates are available for congenital or acquired

factor deficiencies.1

• Immunoglobulin products. Immunoglobulin concentrate contains

160mg/ mL of human plasma proteins and is 98% immunoglobulin

(mainly immunoglobulin G). Specific immunoglobulins are obtained from

individuals with a high titre of the antibody required and include tetanus,

anti- D and hepatitis B immunoglobulin. Mostly administered via a slow

IM injection, except for IV immunoglobulin.1

• Albumin suspension concentrations vary internationally but are typically

available in 4– 5% (40– 50g/ L) and 20% (200g/ L). they are pasteurised

to reduce the transmission of viral diseases (see % p. 467).

Safe transfusion

• Informed consent. Competent patients should be provided with

information on risks, benefits and alternative therapies.

• Confirm patient identity, verbally with the patient if possible and by

identification band.

• Check unit to be transfused against prescription. Check unit is within

expiry date and that unit numbers match between the laboratory-

generated label attached to the pack and the pack itself.

• Inspect the bag, ensuring integrity of the plastic casing. Look for

discoloration or evidence of clumping.

• Infuse through a blood administration set with a 170–2 00 micrometres

integral screen filter. typically each filter can be used for 4 units of

packed red cells during normal transfusion or 8–1 0 units during a massive

transfusion, provided flow rates are adequate without evidence of

clogging of the filter. Platelet concentrates should not be infused through

giving sets that have been used for red cells due to risk of clumping.

Infuse each unit within recommended time frames (table 17.2).1,2

• Monitor for adverse events.

• Single unit transfusion. In stable, non- bleeding, normovolaemic patients,

transfusion should be conducted 1 unit at a time.2

• Documentation. a 100% traceability of transfused blood is a legal

requirement in the UK2 and other countries.

Compatibility testing

Group and screen

a patient’s blood sample is tested to determine aBO and rhD antigen type

and to detect red cell antibodies. the sample validity period during which

X-m atched blood may be provided depends on the patient’s transfusion

and obstetric history and varies from 72h to 21d. Once transfusion has

commenced, samples are valid for 72h.

## 頁面 474

BLOOD PrODUCtS 453

Table 17.2 time limits for infusions

Component Start time Completion time

Packed red cells <30min <4h

Platelets Immediately <1h

FFP <30min <4h

Cryoprecipitate Immediately <4h

Compatibility testing

this involves either a serological crossmatch to ensure compatibility or an

electronic crossmatch on the basis of the antibody screen.

Transfusion compatibility

ABO compatibility

Normal individuals produce immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies against the

a or B antigens which are not expressed on their cells. aBO compatibility

prevents acute haemolytic transfusion reactions caused by recipient IgM

antibodies binding a or B antigens on donor red cells.1

• Red cells express aBO antigens and recipients must be transfused with

aBO- compatible units to prevent serious harm or death.1

• Platelets weakly express aBO antigens. therefore, recipients should be

transfused with aBO- compatible units. Non- aBO- compatible units of

platelets can be used in the event of life- threatening haemorrhage, but

these platelets will have a reduced lifespan in vivo.1

• Cryoprecipitate and FFP contain anti- B or anti- a IgM antibodies,

depending on the donor blood group. For donated plasma to be

compatible, it must not contain IgM antibodies against antigens

expressed on recipient cells.1

(See table 17.3.)

Table 17.3 aBO compatibility of components and recipients

Recipient Compatible donor

Red cells Platelets FFP/ cryoprecipitate

O O O or a O, a, B or aB

A a or O a or O a or aB

B B or O B or O B or aB

AB aB, a, B or O aB, a, B or O aB

Unknown O O aB

### 表格


| Table 17.2 time limits for infusions |
| --- |
| Component Start time Completion time |
| Packed red cells <30min <4h Platelets Immediately <1h FFP <30min <4h Cryoprecipitate Immediately <4h |



## 頁面 475

454

454 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

RhD compatibility

Immunoglobulin G antibodies against the rhD antigen (also known as anti-

D) only form as a result of allogeneic exposure (e.g. transfusion or preg-

nancy). Compatibility testing prevents exposing rhD-n egative recipients to

the rhD antigen in transfused units.1

• Red cells express rhD antigens. this is of particular importance for all

♀ of reproductive potential to prevent future haemolytic disease of

the newborn (due to maternal anti- D harming rhD- positive fetuses).

rhD- positive blood may be provided for rhD- negative ♂ or ♀ beyond

reproductive age if blood bank reserves of rhD- negative blood are

depleted.1

• Platelets do not express rhD antigens. however, units should be rhD-

compatible with the recipient as the rhD antigen is highly immunogenic

and residual red cells in the units may sensitise rhD- negative patients.1

• Cryoprecipitate and FFP may contain red cell fragments; however,

these are far less immunogenic than whole red cells. therefore,

cryoprecipitate and FFP of any rhD type can be safely given.1

Positive antibody screens

Patients with positive antibody screens may require specific antigen-n egative

blood components. Not all antibodies detected are of clinical significance,

and discussions with blood bank and a transfusion specialist are warranted.

Uncrossmatched blood

Immediate dispensing of emergency O rhD- negative blood is reserved

for haemorrhagic emergencies in the absence of a group and screen.2

Obtaining blood samples for transfusion X-m atching is a priority early in

haemorrhage management. Group- specific blood (aBO/ rhD) can be is-

sued significantly quicker than fully grouped and screened blood (15min vs

45min). although it has undergone limited testing, group- specific blood is

an alternative to using O rhD-n egative blood when transfusion is required

urgently but not immediately.

Transfusion indications and triggers

Clinical judgement, lab results, POCt and best available evidence deter-

mine the blood components to be prescribed, as well as the timing, dose

and rate of administration. Consideration should also be given to risks,

benefits and available alternatives to transfusion.

Globally, red cell transfusion policies have become increasingly restrictive

in response to emerging evidence of harm associated with unnecessary

transfusion. FFP should not be given for prolonged Pt or INr in the ab-

sence of bleeding. For transfusion triggers, see table 17.4 (red cell),2,4 table

17.5 (cryoprecipitate),2 table 17.6 (platelet)2,4 and table 17.7 (FFP).2

## 頁面 476

BLOOD PrODUCtS 455

Table 17.4 haemoglobin transfusion triggers

Hb level Red cell transfusion indication

<70g/ L transfusion threshold for clinically stable ICU patients5

<80g/ L Patients with acute coronary syndrome, hip fractures or CVS

disease2,5

70– 100g/ L Intraoperative major blood loss or evidence of hypoxaemia

>90g/ L transfusion usually inappropriate. exceptions include impaired

tissue O delivery such as cerebral ischaemia or sepsis

2

Table 17.5 Cryoprecipitate transfusion triggers

Cryoprecipitate transfusion indication

Massive transfusion Given empirically; aim for fibrinogen >1.5g/ L2

Obstetric haemorrhage Given empirically; aim for fibrinogen >1.5g/ L2

DIC If clinical bleeding and consumptive coagulopathy.

aim for fibrinogen level >1.0g/ L2

Functional fibrinogen assays may guide cryoprecipitate transfusion more accurately than absolute

levels in the presence of dysfibrinogenaemia (see % pp. 284–6).

Table 17.6 Platelet transfusion triggers

Platelet count Platelet transfusion indication

<10 × 109/ L transfusion indicated as risk of spontaneous

haemorrhage2

<20 × 109/ L transfusion indicated in the presence of risk factors

for haemorrhage (minor bleeding, sepsis) or in

critically ill patients2

<50 × 109/ L transfusion is indicated for most invasive surgery.2

aoa now recommends >50 × 109/ L for performance

of regional blockade2

<75 × 109/ L transfusion is indicated in massive haemorrhage2 in

order to consistently maintain platelet count at >50

× 109/ L

<100 × 109/ L transfusion is indicated for high- risk closed-

compartment surgeries (ocular surgery,

neurosurgery) 2

Other regardless of platelet count, transfusion may be

appropriate in the presence of pharmacological

platelet inhibition or inherited disorders of platelet

function (see % pp. 277–9)

Contraindications/ ttP, hUS, hIt, immune thrombocytopenic purpura

cautions

### 表格


| Table 17.4 haemoglobin transfusion triggers |
| --- |
| Hb level Red cell transfusion indication |
| <70g/ L transfusion threshold for clinically stable ICU patients5 <80g/ L Patients with acute coronary syndrome, hip fractures or CVS disease2,5 70– 100g/ L Intraoperative major blood loss or evidence of hypoxaemia >90g/ L transfusion usually inappropriate. exceptions include impaired tissue O delivery such as cerebral ischaemia or sepsis 2 |



| Table 17.5 Cryoprecipitate transfusion triggers |
| --- |
| Cryoprecipitate transfusion indication |
| Massive transfusion Given empirically; aim for fibrinogen >1.5g/ L2 Obstetric haemorrhage Given empirically; aim for fibrinogen >1.5g/ L2 DIC If clinical bleeding and consumptive coagulopathy. aim for fibrinogen level >1.0g/ L2 |
| Functional fibrinogen assays may guide cryoprecipitate transfusion more accurately than absolute levels in the presence of dysfibrinogenaemia (see % pp. 284–6). |



## 頁面 477

456

456 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Table 17.7 FFP transfusion triggers

Platelet count FFP transfusion indication

Coagulation factor/ Only if specific factors are unavailable.2 treatment of

protein deficiencies pseudocholinesterase deficiency

Massive transfusion empirically as 1:1 ratio with rBCs, or 15mL/ kg per

blood volume. Maintain INr <1.52

Warfarin reversal FFP used when PCC inappropriate or unavailable

TTP For plasma exchange therapy2

DIC Indicated if DIC is associated with bleeding.2 Initial

dose is 15mL/ kg to maintain INr <1.5

Transfusion risks

transfusion safety requires robust and reliable systems from the point of

blood donation to the point of administration. timely reporting of adverse

events to blood banks is an essential step to aid systems improvement for

the future. adverse events include:1

Common

• Febrile non- haemolytic transfusion reaction (1– 3:100) occurs within

30min of transfusion and is mediated by either cytokines or alloimmune

reactions to contaminant leucocytes. Simple cooling and paracetamol

are sufficient for mild reactions (<1.5°C rise in temperature). Mitigated

by slowing infusions.

• Minor allergy (1– 5:500) commonly presents with mucocutaneous

manifestations, flushing, angio- oedema or urticaria due to recipient

antibodies against leucocyte antigens or plasma proteins.

• Hypotension (1– 2:1000). Idiosyncratic reaction, possibly related to

bradykinin in transfused blood to recipients on aCe inhibitors. Defined

as a 30mmhg drop in systolic BP.

• Transfusion- associated circulatory overload (1– 10:1000). Incidence is

determined by both the volume transfused and patient comorbidity.

• Hypothermia. Prevalent in rapid infusions of large volumes of

blood products. Can worsen all physiological processes, including

cardiovascular function and coagulation.

• Immunosuppression. transfusion may influence the recurrence or

spread of malignancies, as well as the incidence of postoperative

bacterial infections through immunomodulation.

Rare

• Acute haemolytic transfusion reaction (1– 8:100 000). Severe, life-

threatening reaction occurring within 24h of red cell transfusion due to

aBO incompatibility. rarely may result from Kell, Duffy or Kidd antigen

incompatibility. recipient antibodies bind to and haemolyse transfused

erythrocytes, causing complement activation, inflammation, DIC and

shock. Signs and symptoms may be indistinguishable from bacterial

sepsis or anaphylaxis.

## 頁面 478

BLOOD PrODUCtS 457

• Delayed haemolytic transfusion reaction (1:5000). Usually occurs

within 7d but may occur up to 28d after transfusion due to previous

recipient allosensitisation to erythrocyte antigens during pregnancy

or a previous transfusion. results in jaundice, anaemia and rarely

splenomegaly and renal injury due to haemoglobinaemia.

• Bacterial sepsis (<1:10 000). rare, but the leading cause of transfusion-

related mortality. Contamination may occur at any point from donor

phlebotomy to recipient infusion. the highest risk is seen in platelet

transfusions, which are stored at room temperature and are most prone

to bacterial growth. Sepsis due to contaminated red cell transfusion has

a 60% mortality. Inspection of blood components to detect clumping or

discoloration may detect contamination.

• Anaphylaxis (<1:20 000). recipient immune reactions can occur against

any component (see % pp. 1081–3 for anaphylaxis management).

• Viral infection. Screening of donors and donated blood for viral

infections mitigates most risk. residual risk results from individuals

donating blood during ‘window periods’ of active viral infection. Overall

the risk of contracting bloodborne viral infection from transfusions is

1:9.2 million for hIV, 1:6.9 million for hepatitis C and 1:0.8 million for

hepatitis B.

• Post- transfusion purpura (<1:100 000). Most common in ♀ who

have been previously pregnant, due to recipient antibodies against

human platelet- specific antigen. rare and potentially lethal due to

thrombocytopenic haemorrhage.

• TRALI (<1:5000). Non- cardiogenic pulmonary oedema which occurs

within 6h of transfusion of plasma or plasma- containing components.

Clinically indistinguishable from arDS. Severe microvascular injury

results from recipient antibody reactions against transfused leucocyte

or neutrophil antigens. risk is reduced through use of ♂- only plasma

components as multiparous women have higher titres of antihuman

neutrophil antigen and antihuman leucocyte antigen (hLa), implicated in

traLI .2

• TA- GvHD. a usually fatal complication occurring 1– 6w following

transfusion. transfused viable lymphocytes engraft within an

immunocompromised host. these engrafted lymphocytes proliferate

and precipitate multiorgan failure and death through autoimmunity.

Blood warmers

Warming systems are not required for routine transfusion. Indications in-

clude massive transfusion, neonatal exchange transfusions, rewarming

during CPB and transfusions for patients with clinically significant cold re-

active antibodies (cold haemagglutinin disease). Blood components must

not be warmed >41°C and warmers should be fitted with visible thermo-

meters and audible alarms to avoid haemolysis.1

## 頁面 479

458

458 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Patient blood management

Perioperative anaemia is an independent predictor of morbidity and mor-

tality, and blood transfusion is a further independent predictor of poor clinical

outcome.6 Patient blood management is an evidence-b ased, multidisciplinary

approach to reducing requirements for allogeneic blood transfusions and

improving patient outcomes.6,7 a patient’s own blood is now recognised as

a resource which should be conserved and managed to reduce transfusion

rates. Patient blood management consists of three pillars: improving red cell

mass, reducing blood loss and optimising physiological tolerance to anaemia.6

(See also % p. 53.)

Improving red cell mass

anaemia is defined by the WhO as an insufficient circulating red cell mass

with hb <120g/ L in ♀ and <130g/ L in ♂.8 Interventions to improve red

cell mass increase the margin before transfusion thresholds are reached.

red cell mass is i by:

• Investigating anaemia (see % p. 54)

• Iron replacement (see % p. 56)

• B and folate replacement in the presence of deficiencies

12

• Haematopoietic growth factors. human recombinant ePO stimulates

erythropoiesis from bone marrow progenitors6 and is most effective in

patients with renal failure who have reduced levels of endogenous ePO.

Reducing blood loss

• History: identify history of prior haemorrhage, menorrhagia, dental

bleeding, easy bruising and inherited bleeding tendencies.6

• Anticoagulation stewardship: withhold anticoagulant/ antiplatelet agents

as appropriate (see % pp. 269–75; % pp. 278–9).

• Surgical technique: minimally invasive/ percutaneous surgery, local

vasoconstriction, topical haemostatic agents (e.g. fibrin glues),

tourniquets and surgical devices (ultrasonic or laser scalpels).

• Anaesthetic technique: venous pressure can be reduced by avoiding

high intrathoracic pressure, careful patient positioning and avoiding

hypercapnia. Coagulation is optimised by maintaining normothermia and

avoiding acidaemia and hypocalcaemia. Procedure-s pecific techniques:

venodilation in liver surgery, tIVa in eNt surgeries and avoiding jugular

venous obstruction in neurosurgery.

• Tranexamic acid: widely used antifibrinolytic with surgical applications in

trauma, obstetrics, cardiac surgery and orthopaedics.9,10 administered

IV and topically10 (see % p. 281; % pp. 880–1; % pp. 976–8).

• Desmopressin: synthetic analogue of aDh used in von Willebrand

disease and to improve platelet function in uraemia, cirrhosis and

other platelet function disorders. at high doses (>0.3 micrograms/

kg), desmopressin induces the release of vWF and factor VIII from

endothelial cells1 (see % p. 281). Caution must be exercised in

decompensated cardiac failure and hyponatraemia due to antidiuresis.

• Red cell salvage: cell salvage should be considered for all patients

where >500mL, or >10% of total blood volume, loss is predicted.7

autologous whole blood is collected via suction tubing into a reservoir

during surgery using a filter. the blood is anticoagulated with citrate

or heparin, centrifuged to isolate red cells and washed with 1–2 L of

0.9% sodium chloride before being resuspended and reinfused.11 Cell

## 頁面 480

PatIeNt BLOOD MaNa GeMeNt 459

salvage produces packed red cells suspended in 0.9% sodium chloride,

with an hct of 50– 60%, without coagulation factors or platelets. Cell

salvage devices can provide the equivalent of 10 units of bank blood

per hour. absolute contraindications to cell salvage include aspiration of

substances that must not be given IV (e.g. chlorhexidine wash or fibrin

glues).11 relative contraindications requiring risk– benefit assessment

and consent from the patient include collection of blood containing

septic material, malignant cells, and amniotic fluid.11 Leucodepletion

filters reduce the risk associated with salvaged blood in cancer surgery

or from an infected surgical field. In cancer surgery, allogeneic blood

transfusion may worsen outcomes, possibly by immunomodulation, so

some centres advocate cell salvage to avoid this. In CS, the SaLVO trial

did not record any aFe following the routine use of cell salvage, but also

did not demonstrate any reduction in allogeneic transfusion.12 this has

prompted guidelines to recommend cell salvage during CS only where

there is high risk of obstetric haemorrhage.11

• Autologous transfusion: recipients donate and store their own

blood for future requirements to eliminate the need for donor blood

transfusion. Preoperative autologous donation involves blood donation

once a week for 4w leading up to surgery. acute normovolaemic

haemodilution involves whole blood collection immediately

preoperatively; normovolaemia is maintained with crystalloid volume

expansion. Units are anticoagulated, stored and reinfused once surgical

bleeding is encountered.6

• Phlebotomy: avoid unnecessary blood sampling, and sample minimum

blood volumes for tests that are required.

Optimising physiological tolerance to anaemia

anaemia reduces O delivery to tissues by reducing oxyhaemoglobin con-

2

centrations. this can be partially compensated by optimising cardiorespira-

tory function and minimising the metabolic demands of tissues to match O

2

supply to demand.

• Oxygenation: i FiO, hyperventilation.6

2

• Tissue perfusion: increase both CO and tissue perfusion with fluid

therapy, vasopressors and inotropes.6

• O consumption: reduced by treating pain and infection.6 In severe life-

2

threatening anaemia, hypothermia, hyperbaric oxygenation, sedation,

muscle paralysis and mechanical ventilation can also reduce metabolic

work.

## 頁面 481

460

460 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Massive transfusion

Introduction

More than 5 units of PrBCs in <4h or >10 units of PrBCs administered to

a patient within 24h is considered a massive transfusion.

• Goals of therapy are to expand circulating volume rapidly, economically

and without adverse effects.

• the current standard of care in the resuscitation of severe

haemorrhage is administration of blood components (platelets, plasma

and PrBCs) in a 1:1:1 ratio.13

Physiology of massive haemorrhage and transfusion14

• rapid, large-v olume haemorrhage results in systemic hypoperfusion and

reduced O delivery to tissues, causing acidosis.

2

• acidosis, hypothermia and coagulopathy are known as the ‘triad of

death’ in massive haemorrhage. each individually causes worsening of

the other two components of the triad.

• hypoperfusion also activates the protein C pathway, deactivating

factors Va and VIIIa and initiating fibrinolysis and coagulopathy.

• Consumption of clotting factors may lead to DIC.

• administration of cold IV fluids and exposure of the patient for vascular

access and resuscitation may lead to hypothermia.

• hypothermia and acidosis reduce myocardial contractility, precipitate

bradycardia and dysrhythmias and cause vasodilation and hypotension.

they also reduce activity of clotting factors and platelets, with clotting

factor function d by 10% for every 0.1 reduction in ph.

• transfused red cells are not as effective at O delivery as endogenous

2

red cells.

Resuscitation priorities during massive haemorrhage and

transfusion1

(See also % p. 971.)

Adequate staffing and assistance

• Call for additional senior surgical and anaesthetic help.

• Nominate a crisis leader to manage and assign roles to staff present.

• Notify blood bank and declare need for massive transfusion; this will

result in more blood bank staff dedicated to X- matching and thawing

blood products in readiness for use.

• a dedicated ‘runner’ to obtain blood products from the blood bank.

• additional staff to check/a dminister blood products as they arrive.

• additional theatre staff to set up key equipment.

Maintain circulating volume

• Obtain rapid source control of haemorrhage (e.g. surgical, endoscopic,

interventional radiology).

• Immediately request 3 units of PrBCs; use O-n egative emergency

blood if X- matched blood not immediately available.

• Obtain large- bore IV access; give crystalloid until blood arrives.

• Increase FiO to 100% to improve tissue O delivery. Consider reducing

2 2

dose of anaesthetic agent administered.

## 頁面 482

MaSSIVe traNSFUSION 461

Request additional equipment

• rapid- infusing device (e.g. Belmont™ or Level- 1™)

• Deployment of cell salvage.

Prevent hypothermia

• Forced air warming devices (e.g. Bair hugger™)

• Increasing the ambient room temperature

• Infusing via fluid warmers.

Prevent and treat coagulopathy

• Balanced transfusion of blood products in 1:1:1 ratio.

• POCt to identify factor deficiencies and detect DIC.

• aBG, formal FBC, coagulation studies and electrolytes sent to the lab

and marked as urgent— should be performed every 30min.

• Consider dose of antifibrinolytic (tranexamic acid, 1g IV over 10min) if

within 3h of traumatic event.

• Consider recombinant factor VIIa (NovoSeven®; 90 micrograms/ kg IV)

if surgical bleeding controlled and ph >7.2. Use with caution in patients

at risk of thrombosis and discuss with haematologist.

• Discuss with haematologist in non- surgical uncontrolled bleeding (e.g.

variceal bleeding) unresponsive to PrBCs/ FFP/ platelets, anticoagulated

patients or patients with inherited bleeding disorders.

Treat sequelae of massive transfusion

treat d Ca2+ and i K+ with slow IV injection of 10mL of calcium chloride

10% (see % pp. 240–1 for further treatment of i K+).

Treatment goals1

Mean arterial pressure

• Do not aim to normalise until there is surgical control.

• >50mmhg (>70mmhg if head injury).

Haemoglobin

• >70g/ L.

Fibrinogen

• >1.5g/ L (>2g/ L in obstetric patients).

Platelets

• >75 × 109/ L.

Ionised calcium

• >1mmol/ L on blood gas sample.

pH

• 7.35– 7.45.

PT/ APTT

• <1.5 times upper limit of normal/ baseline.

## 頁面 483

462

462 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Jehovah’s Witnesses

there are over 8 million members of the Jehovah’s Witness movement

worldwide.15,16,17 Most Jehovah’s Witnesses refuse receipt of ‘primary blood

components’ (whole blood, including autologous preoperative donation,

PrBCs, platelets, white cells and FFP). the acceptance of ‘blood fractions’

is variable and up to each individual’s interpretation of the church’s teach-

ings. Blood fractions, or derivatives, include cryoprecipitate, clotting factor

concentrates, albumin and immunoglobulin. So long as lines are primed

with non- blood fluids, intraoperative cell salvage is often acceptable, as are

apheresis, haemodialysis, CPB and normovolaemic haemodilution. IV iron

and tranexamic acid are pharmacological agents that present no quandary

and may reduce postoperative anaemia. Determining and documenting pre-

cisely which products, components and techniques a Jehovah’s Witness pa-

tient is willing to accept are therefore of critical importance when planning

for surgery.16,17

Ethical and legal considerations

Competent patients

Competent patients have the right to autonomously decline transfusion.

For this to be informed consent, an anaesthetist is obliged to inform pa-

tients of the risks, benefits and alternatives to their decision, including the

probable outcomes of doing nothing. Clinicians must also be satisfied that

a patient’s decision is free from coercion,16 which may require consenting a

patient individually, away from family or associates. administration of blood

products to a competent patient who has refused blood transfusion is un-

lawful and may lead to professional and criminal proceedings against the

doctor.17

Advance directives

advance directives state a patient’s acceptance or otherwise of specific

medical interventions for situations in which they would be unable to pro-

vide consent. they must contain clear and medically interpretable instruc-

tions about the treatments which are acceptable or unacceptable. they

must also be clear that these directives are to apply even if a patient’s life

is at risk.17 advance directives may be issued by a church; however, these

often lack sufficient medical detail.16 Many hospitals will therefore have

checklist- styled forms to clearly document a patient’s consent.

Emergency surgery

Conscious and competent patients

Conscious and competent patients must be provided the opportunity

for informed consent and have their wishes regarding blood transfusion

acceptance— or refusal— respected.16,17

Unconscious or incompetent patients

Unconscious or incompetent Jehovah’s Witness patients present uncer-

tainty. In emergency situations where a patient’s wishes are unknown, doc-

tors must act in the best interests of the incompetent patient, which may

include providing blood transfusion.17 Opinions of relatives or associates

that the patient would not accept a blood transfusion are insufficient, and

advance directives should be sought and verified. If the proposed treatment

## 頁面 484

JehOVah’S WItNeSSeS 463

is included in a verified advance directive, the patient’s wishes must be re-

spected unless there is evidence that the directive no longer represents the

patient’s wishes. 17 Inclusion of senior departmental and legal support staff

is advisable.

Children

Children of Jehovah’s Witnesses may present particular difficulty. If the

parents refuse permission for blood transfusion, it may be necessary to

apply for a legal guardianship in order to administer a blood transfusion. In

an emergency situation, when the child of Jehovah’s Witnesses is likely to

die without blood transfusion, blood should be given.17 Courts are likely to

uphold this medical decision.16

Elective surgery

• Early assessment: meet the patient as early as possible to maximise

available time for communication, optimisation and planning.

• Patient blood management (see % pp. 458–9): optimise red cell mass

preoperatively; minimise bleeding and optimise physiological tolerance

to anaemia. Patients should be assessed >6w before major surgery to

ensure hb >130g/ L.17

• Multidisciplinary input to produce a comprehensive management

strategy.

• Clearly communicate with the patient at each stage of planning.

Support people (e.g. family members, church members or the

Jehovah’s Witness hospital liaison) may assist communication and the

understanding of both parties.17 Be mindful that patient consent must be

free from coercion.16

• Document all meetings, discussions, correspondence, consents and

advance directives.

• Surgical planning: decide when, where, how and by whom the patient

will be operated upon. Consider booking surgery early in the week and

1st on the list to allow for expedient management of complications if

they occur. Plan for a senior surgical team, minimally invasive surgery

and staged procedures if appropriate. the role of interventional

radiologists for pre- embolisation or placement of arterial balloon

catheters should also be considered.

• Autologous transfusion: strongly consider red cell salvage— the

majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses will accept this. acute normovolaemic

haemodilution may also be acceptable.17

• Intraoperative: issues need to be highlighted at team briefing and during

the surgical safety checklist.17

• Postoperative: anticipate requirement for critical care, monitoring

and resources required for expedient intervention for haemorrhagic

complications. ensure thorough handover, including the wishes of the

patient.17

## 頁面 485

464

464 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Fluid therapy

routine fasting for minor surgery is usually well tolerated by healthy patients

with minimal disturbance to fluid status or electrolyte levels.18 the magni-

tude of disturbance to fluid and electrolyte homeostasis is dependent on

fasting times, the extent of surgery, age, patient comorbidity and the nature

and severity of acute pathology present. Disease, anaesthesia, trauma and

surgery precipitate a combined metabolic, neuroendocrine, immunological

and inflammatory stress response which readily disrupts fluid homeostasis

(table 17.8). Concepts such as liberal, restrictive and goal- directed fluid

therapy have all gained popularity within the last two decades at various

times. Clarity around the optimal strategy for a given patient, with a given

pathology and a given collection of comorbidities, undergoing a given sur-

gery remains elusive, however.

Normal fluid and electrolyte balance

Under normal homeostatic conditions, net input and output of fluid and

electrolytes are equal. Mean 24h water intake, around 2500mL, roughly

constitutes 1500mL of fluid, 750mL of food and 250mL of metabolic water.

Output is balanced with 1500mL as urine, 100mL in faeces and 900mL as

insensible loss. Daily requirements of electrolytes are listed in table 17.8.

Table 17.8 Daily requirements of common electrolytes

Plasma concentration (mmol/ L) Daily requirement

(mmol/ kg/ d)

Na+ 135– 145 1– 1.5

K+ 3.5– 5.0 1– 1.5

Mg2+ 0.75– 1.05 0.1– 0.2

Ca2+ 2.12– 2.65 (total), 1.0 (ionised) 0.1– 0.2

Cl– 95– 105 0.07– 0.22

Phosphate 0.8– 1.45 20– 40

Fluid compartments

Water constitutes 60% total body weight (600mL/ kg). tBW comprises:

• Intracellular fluid: 66% total body weight (400mL/ kg)

• eCF: 33% total body weight (200mL/k g)

• Interstitial fluid: 75% eCF (150mL/k g)

• Plasma: 25% eCF (50mL/ kg).

The glycocalyx

• Structure: membrane- bound, carbohydrate- rich proteoglycan and

glycoprotein layer on the luminal surface of vascular endothelium.

• Function: vascular permeability, coagulation, inflammation, antioxidation

and regulating transluminal oncotic pressures.19 a non- circulating

volume of 700– 1000mL of plasma volume is fixed within the endothelial

glycocalyx. theoretically, isotonic crystalloid will distribute through this,

while colloid fluids will not.

## 頁面 486

FLUID theraPy 465

• Pathology: the glycocalyx is readily disturbed by trauma, metabolic/

osmotic insults, inflammation, hypovolaemia, hypervolaemia and

artificial colloids. Collectively, this is called shock-i nduced

endotheliopathy and results in fluid movement from the intravascular to

the interstitial compartments.19

Assessment of fluid status

accurate assessment of fluid status is difficult, but history, examination and

bedside tests are usually sufficient to assess potential fluid responsiveness.

this clinical assessment is then supported by available investigations.

• History: fasting times, self- reported oral intake/ GI losses, blood loss,

timing since last dialysis, etc.

• Medications: diuretics, antihypertensives.

• Fluid balance chart: assess trends between enteral and parenteral fluid

intake, balanced against GI losses, urine output and surgical drains, etc.

• Vital signs: trends in BP, hr, rr, GCS and urine output.

• Clinical examination (table 17.9): possibly the least predictive tool

when assessing fluid responsiveness.20

• Passive leg raise: increases preload in the volume- deplete patient to

augment stroke volume and BP. this is a simple, highly predictive means

of assessing the utility of fluid therapy in a hypotensive patient. If

negative, a patient is highly unlikely to be fluid- responsive.20

• SVV/ PPV: cyclical changes in intrathoracic pressure from positive

pressure ventilation induce changes in LV preload. this variation in

preload, as seen in SVV and PPV, is predictive of fluid responsiveness.

• CVP: low CVP <8mmhg is associated with fluid responsiveness.20 CVP

monitoring is unlikely to be useful in haemodynamically stable patients.21

• Haemodynamic monitoring: PPV, oesophageal Doppler, PICCO™,

LiDCO™ rapid, Pa catheters and Cheetah NICOM®, especially with

dynamic fluid challenges, are probably the most reliable method of

measuring and replacing lost fluid.

• CXR: provides evidence of cardiomegaly, pulmonary congestion and

pulmonary oedema due to fluid overload.

• Laboratory investigations: tissue hypoperfusion will manifest in acidosis,

acidaemia, lactataemia and reduced base excess. elevated creatinine/

urea/ hct, reduced CC and low urine acidity/ Na+ concentration

indicate dehydration.

• Echocardiography: quantifies ventricular function, as well as preload,

via vena caval and ventricular filling. respiratory variation in vena cava

diameter >15% is associated with fluid responsiveness.20

Table 17.9 Signs and symptoms of dehydration

Body weight loss (%) Signs and symptoms

5 thirst, dry mouth

5– 10 d peripheral perfusion, d skin turgor, postural dizziness,

oliguria, d CVP, lassitude, tachycardia

10– 15 i rr, hypotension, anuria, delirium, coma

>15 Life- threatening

### 表格


| Table 17.9 Signs and symptoms of dehydration |
| --- |
| Body weight loss (%) Signs and symptoms |
| 5 thirst, dry mouth 5– 10 d peripheral perfusion, d skin turgor, postural dizziness, oliguria, d CVP, lassitude, tachycardia 10– 15 i rr, hypotension, anuria, delirium, coma >15 Life- threatening |



## 頁面 487

466

466 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Dynamic fluid challenges

this is a real-w orld approach to fluid management, commonly employed in

the theatre environment.

• Use boluses of 100– 200mL of crystalloid.22 assess clinical response to

boluses. haemodynamic endpoints may include improvements in urine

output, hr, stroke volume, BP, CVP, PPV, SVV, lactate, ph, etc.

• remain vigilant for alternative causes for haemodynamic compromise.

hypoperfusion may be due to hypovolaemic or cardiogenic causes, or

distributive or obstructive processes.

• assess cumulative blood loss and requirement for transfusion.

• repeat boluses, with frequent reassessment.

Crystalloids

(See table 17.10.)

Balanced salt solutions

examples: hartmann’s solution, Plasma- Lyte 148®:

• First- line replacement therapy in the perioperative period.

• Isotonic balanced salt solutions are the 1° maintenance fluid for all major

surgery at 1– 3mL/ kg/ h.

• Physiological composition, used to replace eCF.

• Organic anions offset chloride concentrations to maintain

electroneutrality. May reduce iatrogenic hyperchloraemic metabolic

acidosis and associated renal dysfunction, associated with infusions of

solutions with higher chloride concentrations.23,24,25,26,27

• the addition of K+ and Ca2+ may limit usefulness in i K+ or with citrated

blood transfusions.

Sodium chloride 0.9%

• Commonly used for electrolyte replacement and useful for replacing

electrolyte-r ich GI losses.

• Infusion of 0.9% sodium chloride solutions is associated with

hyperchloraemic acidosis which may induce renal hypoperfusion and

inflammation.26 this may contribute to aKI in both critically unwell and

non- critically unwell patients.23,24,25,26,27

Glucose solutions

examples: Glucose 5%, glucose 4%– sodium chloride 0.18%:

• Glucose 5% is a convenient way of giving free water, used to restore

dehydration associated with water loss.

• d Na+ may occur with excessive use; therefore, these have little role in

routine daily fluid management in adults.

• No role as plasma expanders due to deleterious osmotic effects.

• Glucose solutions are not an effective energy source for metabolism,

but glucose is available in 10%, 20% and 50% solutions to promote

normoglycaemia.

## 頁面 488

FLUID theraPy 467

Colloids

(See table 17.10.)

Colloids are homogeneous, non- crystalline substances, consisting of

large molecules which persist in the vascular compartment to expand the

functional plasma volume (lasting several hours to several days). Duration

of action is determined by physicochemical properties, integrity of the

glycocalyx/ capillary membrane and pharmacokinetics of metabolism and

clearance.

Human albumin solution

• Molecular weight (MW) 69 000.

• available as a 4– 5% solution for the treatment of hypovolaemia, and as

a salt- poor 20% solution for the treatment of hypoalbuminaemia.

• Like other blood products, haS is manufactured from fractionation

of whole blood. Concern of theoretical transmission of variant

Creutzfeldt– Jakob disease (vCJD) in the UK has resulted in this product

currently being imported from the US, and it is thus expensive.

• albumin has not been shown to improve survival in either all-c omer

admissions to intensive care28 or in the treatment of severe sepsis.29

• Used in the treatment of hypovolaemic shock, although post hoc

analysis of the SaFe trial demonstrated an association with i mortality

when albumin was used, rather than 0.9% sodium chloride, in the

resuscitation of critically ill patients with traumatic brain injuries.30

• also used as a priming fluid in CPB and as a replacement solution in

plasma exchange.

Table 17.10 Composition of common intravenous fluids

Na+ K+ Ca2+ Chloride Other pH mOsmol/ LCost

(mmol/ (mmol/ (mmol/ (mmol/ L) (£/ L)

L) L) L)

Sodium 154 154 5 308 1

chloride

0.9%

Glucose 30 30 Glucose 4 263 1

4%– sodium 40g

chloride

0.18%

Glucose 5% Glucose 4 278 1

50g

hartmann’s 131 5 2 111 Lactate 6.5 278 2

solution 29mmol/

L

Gelofusine® 154 <0.4 <0.4 120 Gelatin 7.4 274 10

40g

albumin <160 <2 136 albumin 7.4 95

4– 5% 40– 50g

## 頁面 489

468

468 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

Gelatins

examples: Gelofusine® 4%, Physiogel®, Gelafundin® 4%:

• Succinylated gelatins (MW 30 000), presented in sodium chloride

solution.

• Manufactured from bovine collagen from bovine spongiform

encephalopathy- free herds. there have been no reports of vCJD.

• Initially these have a powerful osmotic effect. administration may

rarely lead to histamine release, causing bronchospasm, urticarial rash,

hypotension and tachycardia. May trigger anaphylaxis.

• therapeutic maximal dose is limited by haemodilution.

Hydroxyethyl starches

• Starch solutions have been associated with considerable side effects,

including accumulation, pruritus, renal impairment,31 coagulopathy,

haemorrhage, anaphylaxis and death.

• hydroxyethyl starch products were withdrawn in the UK in 2013

because of safety concerns over their use as resuscitation fluids in

critically ill patients and patients with pre-e xisting renal dysfunction.

Liberal vs restrictive fluids

Over the last two decades, styles of administering fluids have varied be-

tween liberal strategies (designed to replace ‘3rd space’ fluid shifts and ‘in-

sensible’ losses from surgery) and restrictive strategies, aiming to achieve

‘zero balance’, or zero weight gain due to postoperative fluid retention.32

Many eraS pathways incorporate restrictive strategies. however, both lib-

eral and restrictive strategies have been associated with problems.

• From this point of uncertainty, the reLIeF trial by Myles et al. in 2018

has offered some guidance to clinicians.33 this multicentre trial of 3000

patients undergoing major abdominal surgery had a restrictive arm and

a liberal arm during and up to 24h after surgery. aKI and renal

replacement therapy rates were lower in the liberal arm, although

disability- free survival was the same in both groups.

• there is now support for ‘moderately liberal’ fluid regimens for major

abdominal surgery requiring 10– 12mL/k g/ h of IV fluid administered

intraoperatively and 1.5mL/ kg/ h in the following 24h post- surgery.

Other major surgeries which do not result in major fluid shifts are

unlikely to require as much fluid.33,34

Goal- directed fluid therapy

GDFt uses a combination of fluids and inotropic agents administered in a

predetermined algorithm to optimise blood flow to organs.

IV fluids and inotropes are sequentially administered to achieve specific

haemodynamic endpoints (CVP, MaP, stroke volume, CO, cardiac index,

etc.). although appealing, GDFt has not resulted in significant benefits for

patients. Clinical benefits seen in small trials have not been corroborated in

later literature. Nonetheless, GDFt remains in many eraS protocols for

abdominal surgery worldwide.

## 頁面 490

FLUID theraPy 469

References

1 New Zealand Blood Service (2016). Transfusion Medicine Handbook, 3 rd edn. auckland: New

Zealand Blood Service.

2 Klein aa, arnold P, Bingham rM, et al. (2016). aaGBI guidelines: the use of blood components

and their alternatives 2016. anaesthesia, 71, 829– 42.

3 Curry N, Foley C, Wong h, et al. (2018). early fibrinogen concentrate therapy for major haem-

orrhage in trauma (e-F It 1): results from a UK multi-c entre, randomised, double blind, placebo-

controlled pilot trial. Crit Care, 22, 164.

4 Muñoz M, acheson aG, Bisbe e, et al. (2019). an international consensus statement on the man-

agement of postoperative anaemia after major surgical procedures. Anaesthesia, 73, 1418– 31.

5 Mueller MM, Van remoortel h, Meybohm P, et al. (2019). Patient blood management: recom-

mendations from the 2018 Frankfurt Consensus Conference. JAMA, 321, 983– 97.

6 Desai N, Schofield N, richards t (2018). Perioperative patient blood management to improve

outcomes. Anesth Analg, 127, 1211– 20.

7 Franchini M, Marano G, Veropalumbo e, et al. (2019). Patient blood management: a revolu-

tionary approach to transfusion medicine. Blood Transfus, 17, 191– 5.

8 World health Organization (2011). Haemoglobin concentrations for the diagnosis of anaemia and

assessment of severity. M http:// www.who.int/ vmnis/ indicators/ haemoglobin.pdf

9 CraSh-2 trial collaborators; Shakur h, roberts I, Bautista r, et al. (2010). effects of tranexamic

acid on death, vascular occlusive events and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant

haemorrhage (CraSh- 2): a randomised, placebo- controlled trial. Lancet, 376, 23– 32.

10 Ker K, Beecer D, roberts I (2013). topical application of tranexamic acid for the reduction of

bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 7, CD010562.

11 Klein aa, Bailey Cr, Charlton aJ, et al. (2018). association of anaesthetists guidelines: cell sal-

vage for peri- operative blood conservation. Anaesthesia, 73, 1141– 50.

12 Kha KS, Moore PaS, Wilson MJ, et al. (2017). Cell salvage and donor blood transfusion during

cesarean section: a pragmatic, multicentre randomised controlled trial (SaLVO). PLoS Med, 14,

e1002471.

13 holcomb JB, tilley BC, Baraniuk S, et al. (2015). transfusion of plasma, platelets and red blood

cells in a 1:1:1 vs 1:1:2 and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PrOPPr randomized

clinical trial. JAMA, 313, 471– 82.

14 Chang r, Cardenas JC, Wade Ce, holcomb JC (2016). advances in the understanding of trauma-

induced coagulopathy. Blood, 128, 1043– 9.

15 Lima GL, Byk J (2018). trauma and early blood transfusion: the challenging hemorrhage manage-

ment in Jehovah's Witnesses. Rev Col Bras Cir, 45, e1974.

16 West JM (2014). ethical issues in the care of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Curr Opin Anesthesiol,

27, 170– 6.

17 Klein aa, Bailey Cr, Charlton a, et al. (2019). association of anaesthetists: anaesthesia and peri-

operativecare for Jehovah’s Witnesses and patients who refuse blood. Anaesthesia, 74, 74– 82.

18 Jacob M, Chappell D, Conzen P, Finsterer U, rehm M (2008). Blood volume is normal after pre-

operative overnight fasting. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand, 52, 522– 9.

19 astapenko D, Benes J, Pouska J, Lehmann C, Islam S, Cerny V (2019). endothelial glycocalyx

in acute care surgery— what anaesthesiologists need to know for clinical practice. BMC

Anesthesiology, 19, 238.

20 Bentzer P, Griesdale De, Boyd J, MacLean K, Sirounis D, ayas Nt (2016). Will this hemodynam-

ically unstable patient respond to a bolus of intravenous fluids? JAMA, 316, 1298– 309.

21 Marik Pe, Baram M, Vahid B (2008). Does central venous pressure predict fluid responsiveness?

a systematic review of the literature and the tale of seven mares. Chest, 134, 172– 8.

22 Biais M, de Courson h, Lanchon r, et al. (2017). Mini- fluid challenge of 100 ml of crystalloid

predicts fluid responsiveness in the operating room. Anesthesiology, 127, 450– 6.

23 young P, Bailey M, Beasley r, et al. (2015). SPLIt: effect of a buffered crystalloid solution vs saline

on acute kidney injury among patients in the intensive care unit. JAMA, 314, 1701– 10.

24 Shaw aD, Bagshaw SM, Goldstein SL, et al. (2012). Major complications, mortality, and re-

source utilization after open abdominal surgery: 0.9% saline compared to Plasmalyte. Ann Surg,

255, 821– 9.

25 Burdett e, Dushianthan a, Bennett- Guerrero e, et al. (2012). Perioperative buffered versus non-

buffered fluid administration for surgery in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 12, CD004089.

## 頁面 491

470

470 ChaPter 17 Blood products and fluid therapy

26 Self Wh, Semler MW, Wanderer JP, et al. (2018). SaLt- eD: balanced crystalloids versus saline in

noncritically ill adults. N Engl J Med, 378, 819– 28.

27 Semler MW, Self Wh, Wanderer JP, et al. (2018). SMart: balanced crystalloids versus saline in

critically ill adults. N Engl J Med, 378, 829– 39.

28 the SaFe Study Investigators (2004). SaFe: a comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resusci-

tation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med, 350, 2247– 56.

29 Caironi P, tognoni G, Masson S, et al. (2014). aLBIOS: albumin replacement in patients with

severe sepsis or septic shock. N Engl J Med, 370, 1412– 21.

30 the SaFe Study Investigators (2007). SaFe: saline or albumin for fluid resuscitation in patients

with traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med, 357, 874– 84.

31 Myburgh Ja, Finfer S, Bellomo r, et al. (2012). CheSt: hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid

resuscitation in intensive care. N Engl J Med, 367, 1901– 11.

32 Brandstrup B, Svendsen Pe, rasmussen M, et al. (2012). Which goal for fluid therapy during

colorectal surgery is followed by the best outcome: near maximal stroke volume or zero fluid

balance? Br J Anaesth, 109, 191– 9.

33 Myles PS, Bellomo r, Corcoran t, et al.; australian and New Zealand College of anaesthetists

Clinical trials Network and the australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical trials

Group (2018). restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med,

378, 2263– 74.

34 Miller te, Myles PS (2019). Perioperative fluid therapy for major surgery. Anesthesiology, 130,

825– 32.

