# Chapter 18: Specific circumstances

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 492-527*

---

## 頁面 492

Chapter 18 447711

Specific circumstances

Matthew Evans and Leigh Kelligher

Oncological impact of anaesthesia 472

Oncological considerations 474

Susanna Ritchie- McLean

General principles of laser surgery 476

Safety in laser surgery 478

Jakob Mathiszig- Lee

Robotic surgery 480

Mary Stocker

Day surgery 483

Conduct of day case anaesthesia 487

Laura Bainbridge

Neurological determination of death 493

Organ donation surgery after brain death 497

Major anaesthetic mishaps: what to do in the aftermath 503

## 頁面 493

472

472 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Oncological impact of anaesthesia

The perioperative period

the perioperative period is a crucial phase in the surgical treatment of

cancer, and events occurring during this time may affect patients’ onco-

logical outcomes.

Surgical tissue trauma and manipulation have been shown to produce

both local and haematogenous spread of tumour cells from the 1° tumour.

this and occasions where resection has been incomplete result in the per-

sistence of viable malignant cells throughout the perioperative period—s o-

termed ‘minimal residual disease’.

the surgical stress response creates a protumorigenic microenvironment

within the body via a variety of mechanisms, including:

• Release of growth and angiogenic factors: prostaglandin e2, platelet-

derived growth factor (pDGF), insulin growth factor (IGF), hypoxia-

inducible factor 1α, vascular endothelial growth factor (VeGF)

• Release of factors that promote tumour cell invasiveness: such as

matrix metalloproteinases

• Induction of intracellular mitogenic signalling pathways, promoting

cellular proliferation and reducing apoptosis

• Immunosuppression, especially of cell- mediated immunity with a

reduction in both the volume and activity of natural killer (NK), CD4

and CD8 cells. this part of the immune system is thought to be

particularly vital in the detection and destruction of micrometastases.

the perioperative period therefore may comprise a ‘perfect storm’ of cir-

cumstances that favour the early recurrence/m etastasis of cancer. there is

evidence from both animal and human studies for this effect.

Rationale for the role of anaesthesia in influencing

oncological outcome

there is a large body of evidence demonstrating how various anaesthetic

techniques/ perioperative interventions may modify different elements of

the surgical stress response.

It is postulated that by altering both the nature and magnitude of the

stress response, different anaesthetic techniques may produce different

postoperative oncological outcomes.

Current controversies and the corresponding evidence

Volatile anaesthesia vs TIVA

Volatile anaesthetic agents have been shown to induce the expression of

tumorigenic growth factors (including hypoxia-i nducible factor 1α and IGF)

and produce immunosuppression, principally via inhibition of NK cells and

cytotoxic t- lymphocytes. Conversely, propofol has been shown to reduce

the expression of hypoxia-i nducible factor 1α and have much less immuno-

suppressive effects. this has led to a body of opinion that propofol- based

tIVa may be preferential to volatiles in oncological surgery and may even

be associated with better oncological outcomes. While there are a number

of retrospective cohort studies that support this hypothesis, there are no

positive prospective studies to date. a recent prospective RCt found no

benefit of propofol tIVa with regional anaesthesia vs volatile anaesthesia

## 頁面 494

ONCOlOGICal IMpaCt OF aNaeStheSIa 473

and opioids in breast cancer patients. the definitive case for the benefit of

propofol over volatile anaesthesia in cancer surgery is yet to be made; how-

ever, it should be noted that no evidence exists showing propofol is worse.

Opioid analgesia

Opioid analgesics mediate their effect principally via the mu-o pioid re-

ceptor. this receptor is known to be overexpressed on many cancer cell

types and is postulated to play a role in tumour growth and development.

high levels of mu-o pioid receptor expression have been correlated with

worse oncological outcomes in clinical studies. It has therefore been postu-

lated that perioperative opioids may be tumorigenic via their action on, and

induction of, the mu- opioid receptor. the clinical evidence to date does not

support this and it remains a theoretical risk.

Regional anaesthesia

Following on from the theoretical risk of opioid analgesics, it has been

postulated that, by minimising surgical stress and reducing opioid usage,

regional anaesthesia may be beneficial in oncological surgery. Current evi-

dence is mixed and the use of regional anaesthesia for this purpose alone

cannot be recommended.

NSAIDs

Via inhibition of COX, NSaIDs reduce the expression of a number of

growth factors, including prostaglandin e2, which has been implicated

in a variety of tumorigenic processes. It is postulated that perioperative

NSaID use may therefore reduce the risk of tumour recurrence/ metas-

tasis. Clinical evidence of a significant effect following perioperative NSaID

administration is lacking.

Dexamethasone

Steroids are known to be immunosuppressive and therefore, it has been

questioned whether the use of dexamethasone perioperatively is appro-

priate in cancer surgery. there is no clinical evidence to support this hy-

pothesis at the time of writing.

Recommendations for practice

While there is biological plausibility for some of the interventions above

being recommended/a voided in cancer surgery, definitive evidence—a nd

therefore evidence- based guidance for practice— is still some way off.

the best approach has to be a pragmatic one, taking into account the

patient’s needs and preferences and the options available. the overall

guiding principle must be to adopt a strategy that minimises the physiological

insult and stress of surgery and produces a rapid, high- quality recovery and

return to premorbid function, allowing the patient to move on to the next

phase of their cancer treatment in the optimum time frame. Initiatives such

as eRaS, or other fast- track recovery programmes, utilising many of the

interventions described above, produce good short- term postoperative re-

covery and may also be beneficial for oncological outcomes.

## 頁面 495

474

474 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Oncological considerations

General considerations

Cardiac injury

May be induced by drugs (anthracyclines, fluorouracil, trastuzumab) or the

stress of chemotherapy on a compromised heart. anthracycline-i nduced

cardiac failure may be irreversible and has a mortality of above 30%.

Bleomycin exposure as part of chemotherapy conveys the potential risk of

rapidly progressive pulmonary toxicity. pulmonary toxicity occurs in 10% of

patients exposed to bleomycin, with acute, followed by chronic, fibrosing

alveolitis. avoidance of high inspired O concentrations and careful fluid

2

management are recommended. Bleomycin is notably administered in germ

cell tumours and hodgkin lymphoma.

Cytokine release syndrome an acute systemic inflammatory response to

immunotherapies, including chimeric antigen receptor t- cell therapy,

heralded by fever. associated features may range from mild flu-l ike

symptoms to severe life- threatening circulatory collapse.

Hepatic veno- occlusive disease a progressive obliteration of venous channels

in the liver.

Tumour lysis syndrome Can follow initial chemotherapy (typically for

lymphoma and high- count leukaemias). Mass cell death leads to acute renal

impairment, with hyperkalaemia, hyperuricaemia, hyperphosphataemia and

hypocalcaemia.

Mediastinal masses (particularly in leukaemia or lymphoma patients)

can cause complete airway collapse under anaesthesia, even in the

asymptomatic. Warning signs include stridor, wheeze, orthopnoea and SVC

obstruction.

SVC obstruction Can arise from compression by a tumour or lymph

nodes (usually bronchogenic carcinoma) or direct vessel invasion. pleural

effusions and ascites are common in ovarian cancer, metastatic disease and

mesothelioma.

Paraneoplastic syndromes

Occur in 10% of cancer patients1 (especially lung, lymphoma, breast, pros-

tate, ovarian and pancreatic tumours). anaesthetic considerations:

• lambert-eaton myasthenic syndrome is common in small-c ell lung

cancer and breast, thymus and GI tract tumours (see % p. 316).

• Cushing’s syndrome may occur in tumours of the lung, pancreas,

thymus and ovary (see % p. 232).

• hypercalcaemia may be caused by bony metastases or pth-l ike

compounds.

• hyponatraemia and SIaDh-l ike syndromes may be caused by small-c ell

lung cancer and also lymphoma, leukaemia and pancreatic/c arcinoid

tumours (see % p. 242).

• Cachexia can be caused by vomiting, loss of appetite or other GI

disturbances. hypoalbuminaemia (<35g/ l) is a risk factor for poor

outcomes.2

## 頁面 496

ONCOlOGICal CONSIDeRatIONS 475

Radiotherapy May cause fever and nausea/ vomiting, and patients may be

dehydrated. previous radiotherapy causes ongoing localised fibrosis, which

may impede laryngoscopy and airway management.

Chemotherapy Commonly causes immunosuppression and myelosup-

pression.

VTE affects at least 15% of cancer patients.

Do Not Attempt Resuscitation (DNAR) orders May be present in cancer

patients. Where these conflict with safe anaesthetic principles, it is

reasonable to modify or suspend the order perioperatively (see % p. 42).

Anaesthesia for oncological procedures

Venous access port insertion (e.g. Portacath)

Commonly targets the left subclavian vein as the 1st- choice access vessel,

and makes use of a totally implantable venous access device. line place-

ment can be under Ga or la ± sedation, dependent on local practices

and patient choice. Following insertion, a chest radiograph is required to

confirm placement and exclude complications, including pneumothorax and

haemothorax. pICC lines are frequently used in oncology patients. (See also

% p. 360.)

Isolated limb perfusion Used in some centres for unresectable cases of

cutaneous melanoma and sarcoma. It involves obtaining access to an

extremity artery and vein, an extracorporeal circuit and a pneumatic

tourniquet to isolate the target limb. It enables significantly higher

concentrations of cytotoxic agents (e.g. melphalan and tNF-α ) to be

administered while limiting systemic side effects. Consequently, careful

monitoring for evidence of systemic leakage is required, and appropriate

invasive monitoring and central venous access is advised.

Brachytherapy places a radioactive source close to the tumour via an

applicator. It is often used in patients unfit for surgery and may involve

single or multiple treatments. procedures usually last 1.5–3 h but may be

longer and may include a transfer to Ct. Blood loss is usually minimal,

but postoperative pain may be an issue. postoperative radioactivity can

require patients to be recovered in an isolated environment. anaesthetic

options are:

• light Ga

• Sedation (although this may not produce reliable immobility)

• epidural or spinal anaesthesia (some procedures may outlast spinal

block, requiring the insertion of catheters). (See % p. 729.)

References

1 pelosof l, Gerber D (2010). paraneoplastic syndromes: an approach to diagnosis and treatment.

Mayo Clin Proc, 85, 838– 54.

2 Nazha B, Moussaly e, Zaarour M, et al. (2015). hypoalbuminaemia in colorectal cancer prognosis:

nutritional marker or inflammatory surrogate? World J Gastrointest Surg, 7, 370– 7.

## 頁面 497

476

476 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

General principles of laser surgery

laser is an acronym for light amplification by Stimulated emission of

Radiation. the laser is a high- energy light beam capable of delivering a large

amount of energy to very small areas. H lasers have numerous medical and

surgical applications, but also create unique hazards to patients and staff.

• light is a form of radiant energy that spans the mid-r ange of the electro-

magnetic spectrum. laser light is generated by applying energy to a ‘lasing

medium’ to cause photon release. light is generated when electrons move

from higher- to lower-e nergy shells surrounding the nucleus of an atom.

• Because the emitting atoms in a lasing medium are all identical, the

photons released when the electrons change shells are also identical—

the photons are all of the same wavelength (colour); they are in-p hase

(the peaks and troughs of the wave are synchronised, amplifying, rather

than cancelling out, each other), and they have the same polarisation

(wave orientation). this explains why laser light is of much higher

intensity and energy than normal light.

• Mirrors direct escaping photons back into the lasing medium to

generate the release of yet more photons. the laser beam escapes

through a narrow aperture in the mirror.

• Fibreoptic bundles are used to transmit visible and near-i nfrared

wavelength lasers. lasers of longer wavelength, e.g. the CO laser, can

2

only be directed by a series of mirrors.

• the type of atoms in the lasing medium determines the laser

wavelength, which in turn determines the tissue penetration and clinical

applications. each substance has a particular absorption spectrum,

which is determined by its chemical structure. laser light at, or close to,

these frequencies will be the most effective (table 18.1).

• laser light striking a tissue surface may be:

• Reflected: reflection off shiny surfaces may damage the eyes of staff

in the vicinity.

• Transmitted to deeper layers: lasers pass through tissues to a variable

depth, which is partially determined by the wavelength.

• Scattered: shorter wavelengths induce greater scattering.

• Absorbed: this produces the clinical effect when the absorbed light is

converted to heat. Organic tissue contains various substances capable

of absorbing light. these are termed chromophores and include hb,

collagen and melanin. each substance has a particular absorption

spectrum, which is determined by its chemical structure.

Table 18.1 types of surgical laser in common use

Laser type Wavelength (nm) Colour

Dye laser 360– 670 Blue to red

argon 488– 515 Blue/ green

helium– neon 633 Red

Ruby 694 Red

Nd– YaG 1064 Near- infrared

CO 10 600 Far- infrared

2

## 頁面 498

GeNeRal pRINCIpleS OF laSeR SURGeRY 477

Examples of medical lasers

Pulsed dye laser

this uses light at a wavelength that targets RBCs within blood vessels. the

energy is dissipated within the dermis and causes only minimal epidermal

scarring. this is used mainly for treating port wine skin lesions. Children

requiring laser therapy to these lesions will often be subjected to mul-

tiple treatments, usually under Ga. postoperative pain may be a problem,

particularly if large areas are treated. Combinations of paracetamol and

NSaIDs may be effective, but occasionally opioid analgesics are required.

Carbon dioxide laser

these lasers have a long wavelength (10 600nm, outside the visible spec-

trum) and are preferentially absorbed by water. target cells are heated

to the point of vaporisation by the beam. they penetrate to only a very

shallow depth, so tissue damage can be directly observed. they are used in

aesthetic facial surgery to reduce the wrinkling associated with ageing, and

in eNt practice to vaporise vocal cord and airway lesions. Care must be

taken to avoid eye and airway injury (see % pp. 478–9).

Nd– YAG laser

this laser is also outside the visible range and, unlike the CO laser, is trans-

2

mitted through clear fluids and absorbed by dark matter. It can penetrate

to a depth of 1cm. It has multiple applications, including airway neoplasms,

vascular malformations and ophthalmic surgery.

## 頁面 499

478

478 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Safety in laser surgery

the main hazards from laser surgery are inadvertent tissue damage to either

the patient or to staff, risk of fire and inhalation of laser plume particles.

• H a designated laser safety officer should be present at all times when

a laser is in use. In the UK, anyone in theatre where laser is being used

should have had the appropriate training. theatre doors should be

locked from the inside, and signs displayed outside. a checklist should

be completed prior to turning the laser on.

• Medical instruments used with lasers should have matt (rather than

shiny) surfaces to reduce reflection of laser beams around the theatre.

• H eyes are very susceptible to injury. Retinal and corneal damage can

occur, depending on the frequency of the beam. all operating room

personnel must wear safety glasses appropriate for the laser in use.

these should have side shields to protect the lateral aspect of the eye.

If an anaesthetised patient is receiving laser radiation near the eyes,

protective matt metallic eye covers should be applied.

• Some lasers may damage exposed skin, so anaesthetised patients must

have all exposed skin covered with moist swabs. In all cases, the eyes

should be taped closed and covered with moist swabs. Many types of

surgical drapes and anaesthetic tapes are combustible.

• Some skin preparation fluids are flammable and should not be used

during laser surgery.

• H laser light can ignite plastic and rubber materials. Carefully consider

the optimum method of airway maintenance if lasers are employed

within the airway. the simplest method is to use a laser-s afe ett.

hFNO or jet ventilation may also be employed (Fig. 18.1). a low FiO,

2

e.g. 30%, reduces the risk of fire but also decreases apnoea time.

• IV anaesthesia is usually employed to ensure an adequate depth of

anaesthesia. It is also important to prevent the patient from moving or

coughing, so a suitable muscle relaxant should be administered, and

NMB monitored with a nerve stimulator.

• If the use of an ett is required, unmodified conventional plastic tubes

cannot be used, because they support combustion and can potentially

cause airway fires. Various laser- safe etts are available. the cuffs of

these tubes are vulnerable and can be protected by damp pledgets. the

cuff should be filled with 0.9% sodium chloride, which can be mixed

with methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) so that a cuff puncture

is obvious.

• Both NO and O readily support combustion. If using a circuit, 30% O

2 2 2

with air is a sensible choice.

• If a fire occurs in an airway during laser surgery, switch off the laser

immediately, remove the tube and flood the airway with 0.9% sodium

chloride. Once the fire is extinguished, mask ventilation with 100% O

2

should be initiated. Reintubation and bronchoscopy with lavage may be

required. Severe damage may require a tracheostomy.

• H a laser plume is created at the site of contact with human tissue.

this contains fine particulates which are potentially hazardous to health

workers. Smoke evacuation systems must be used to remove laser

plume contaminants. aerosolisation of viruses can occur during laser

surgery for papillomata— special masks are worn to reduce the risk.

## 頁面 500

SaFetY IN laSeR SURGeRY 479

Fig. 18.1 a laserJet ett, with a side port for CO 2 sampling. Courtesy aidan

O’Donnell.

Further reading

Magee p (2018). physics for anaesthesia. Magnetic resonance imaging; depth of anaesthesia moni-

toring; laSeR; and light spectroscopy. BJA Educ, 18, 102– 8. doi:10.1016/ j.bjae.2017.12.004

pearson Kl (2017). anaesthesia for laryngo- tracheal surgery, including tubeless field techniques. BJA

Educ, 17, 242– 8. doi:10.1093/ bjaed/ mkx004

Kitching aJ, edge CJ (2003). lasers and surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 3, 143– 6.

doi:10.1093/ bjacepd/ mkg143

## 頁面 501

480

480 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Robotic surgery

the number of procedures undertaken robotically around the world con-

tinues to grow, with an increasing variety of surgery now possible with ro-

botic systems (table 18.2).

• advantages for the surgeon include i comfort while operating, 3D

video, filtering out of any tremor and scaling of movement to allow for

precision work.

• patient- based advantages include a better cosmetic result from

minimally invasive approaches, reduced pain from port sites and

reduced length of stay.

• the effect of robotic surgery on outcomes is controversial and

procedure- specific. While some papers suggest better oncological

outcomes from robotic procedures, there have been warnings about

poorer survival from other robotic procedures for cancer.

• the i cost and length of time it takes to complete robotic surgery

are an important consideration for institutions, particularly at the

establishment of any robotic programme.

• the considerations for the anaesthetist are largely due to positioning,

length of procedure and the significantly reduced access to the patient

caused by most robotic systems. the docking and undocking of a robot

often takes significant time and rapid removal is rarely possible.

Table 18.2 examples of robotic surgery procedures

Specialty Procedure Considerations

Breast Mastectomy Supine, axillary approach

Cardiac Mitral valve replacement Bleeding from remote port sites

Colorectal large bowel resections Steep head- down, bowel

preparation

eNt thyroidectomy axillary or transoral approach

Base of tongue tumours

Urological prostatectomy Steep head- down

Orthopaedic arthroplasty

Preoperative

It is important to clarify with the surgeon how they will need the patient

positioned as it is likely to be much more extreme or different from a non-

robotic procedure. a high- quality team brief is critical to the smooth run-

ning of a robotic theatre.

• the docking of the robot is one of the rate-l imiting steps of robotic

surgery and so it is useful to ensure a consistent theatre team to reduce

the delay this incurs to a minimum.

• the preassessment of the patient should be as normal. however,

for procedures where prolonged steep head- down is anticipated, a

note should be made of significant glaucoma as this may lead to an i

incidence of ophthalmic complications, including visual loss.

## 頁面 502

ROBOtIC SURGeRY 481

• In robotic laparoscopic surgery, consideration should be made whether

the patient will tolerate a prolonged pneumoperitoneum for robot-

assisted surgery.

• patients due for intra- abdominal surgery, for which an intracorporeal

anastomosis is planned, may have received bowel prep and this should

be enquired about in order to plan fluid therapy.

Perioperative

the overwhelming number of robotic procedures will be done under Ga in

order to ensure a fixed reference point for the robot and due to the length

of most procedures.

• Due to limited access to the patient during surgery, the default airway

choice is an ett. this should be taped (rather than tied) to facilitate

venous drainage of the head.

• H Care must be taken with eyes, particularly in robotic laparoscopic

surgery when the combination of pneumoperitoneum and steep

positioning increases the risk of regurgitation and chemical burns. eyes

should be securely taped, and pads placed.

• H Robot manipulators can extend significantly beyond where a human

operator would hold an instrument. Robotic arms can cause significant

injury to the patient before their clash detection is activated. this

should be mitigated by a secure horizontal metal bar to protect the face

or other vulnerable areas of the patient. If the patient is repositioned

during the procedure, it is important to be vigilant for any new potential

clashes between robot and patient.

• IV access should be well secured with extensions that allow remote

injection of medication. Infusions should be prepared and connected

before docking.

• positioning of the patient is the most important aspect of robotic

surgery. Meticulous attention should be paid to the proper padding of

vulnerable areas, wires, IV lines and the use of any patient supports.

• If shoulder supports are used to prevent the patient from slipping while

in the head- down position, care should be taken that the head is not

hanging free, as this can cause a traction injury of the brachial plexus.

• H Where feasible, breaks of extreme positioning should be taken every

90– 120min to mitigate the risk of compartment syndromes.

• Some robotic systems allow for synchronisation between the table and

robot movements and it is important to check if this is the case before

adjusting the table position while the robot is docked.

• patient movement during the procedure can cause significant problems

and so an infusion of either muscle relaxant or remifentanil is useful.

Postoperative

• prior to extubation, a leak test should be performed, as there can be

significant airway oedema.

• H Cerebral oedema 2° to prolonged head-d own may lead to agitation

and delirium in the immediate recovery period.

• typically, the analgesic plan should be the same as for the non-r obotic

case but can be titrated down as familiarity with the procedure

increases.

## 頁面 503

482

482 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

• Spinal anaesthesia is an excellent option for robotic laparoscopic

surgery, but given the length of some procedures, it may need to be

supplemented at the end with abdominal wall blocks if an open incision

is made to deliver the specimen or create an anastomosis.

Further reading

ashrafian h, Clancy O, Grover V, Darzi a (2017). the evolution of robotic surgery: surgical and

anaesthetic aspects. Br J Anaesth, 119(s1), i72– i8. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aex383

Maerz Da, Beck lN, Sim aJ, Gainsburg DM (2017). Complications of robotic- assisted laparoscopic

surgery distant from the surgical site. Br J Anaesth, 118, 492– 503. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aex003

Irvine M, patil V (2009). anaesthesia for robot-a ssisted laparoscopic surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit

Care Pain, 9, 125– 9. doi:10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mkp020

## 頁面 504

DaY SURGeRY 483

Day surgery

Organisation

a surgical ‘day case’ is a patient who is admitted, operated upon, and dis-

charged on the same calendar day. In the UK (unlike the US), a 24h stay

is not classed as day surgery, as this requires overnight admission and a

hospital bed.

the surgery must have been planned as day surgery. patients who are

booked as inpatients but are successfully discharged on the day of surgery

will not appear in hospital day case statistics. Booking potential day case pa-

tients via an inpatient pathway can result in patient cancellation due to lack

of availability of a postoperative bed which would not have been required

if a day surgery pathway was planned from the outset.

Organisation is the key to efficient, good- quality day surgery and requires

close cooperation between all agencies involved, including surgeons, anaes-

thetists, day unit staff, Gps, patients and their carers.

Facilities an efficient organisation requires ‘ring- fenced’ theatres and ward

space. Day surgery can be managed successfully in a variety of hospital

configurations; however, day cases on inpatient wards and theatres have

a higher admission rate and will suffer cancellation when there are bed

shortages. Self- contained units with their own facilities, but within an acute

hospital, offer the best option.

Escalation It is essential that day surgery facilities will not be used to

accommodate overnight patients at times of hospital escalation. at times

of escalation, it is even more important that the day surgery unit continues

to function efficiently and hence enable the majority of elective surgery to

proceed uninterrupted.

Staff adequately trained and experienced staff should perform day case

anaesthesia and surgery to minimise unplanned admissions. the day surgery

environment provides many opportunities for training of junior staff, but

supervision and guidance from senior clinicians are essential. the unit

should be staffed with nurses and operating department practitioners who

are in themselves expert day surgery practitioners, invested in the success

of the day surgery team.

Day surgery procedures

the British association of Day Surgery has produced a directory which

details over 200 procedures now deemed appropriate to be undertaken

on a day case basis. Day surgery is no longer confined to minor procedures

but embraces the majority of elective surgery and a large percentage of

urgent surgery. there is no time limit for surgical duration; however, consid-

eration must be given when scheduling an operating theatre list to potential

postoperative recovery times for more complex surgery, such that longer

procedures will usually be undertaken in the morning or early afternoon.

For a procedure to be appropriate for day surgery, the following criteria

must be met:

## 頁面 505

484

484 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

• It should be possible to control pain with simple oral analgesia

supplemented, if appropriate, by regional anaesthetic techniques.

• the patient must be able to eat and drink postoperatively.

• the patient must be able to mobilise (with aids if required)

postoperatively.

example day surgery procedures are shown in table 18.3.

Table 18.3 example day surgery procedures

Gynaecology laparoscopic hysterectomy, vaginal repair, vaginal

hysterectomy

General surgery laparoscopic fundoplication

Urology laparoscopic nephrectomy, laparoscopic prostatectomy, laser

resection of prostate

Breast surgery Mastectomy, all non- reconstructive breast cancer surgery

Vascular surgery endovascular aneurysm repair

Orthopaedics total hip/ knee or shoulder replacement

emergency appendicectomy, testicular torsion, ‘hot’ laparoscopic

surgery cholecystectomy, laser of ureteric stones

Emergency day surgery

Moving emergency surgical procedures to an ambulatory pathway confers

many benefits to hospitals and patients. Where possible, patients should

be seen and assessed in a surgical assessment unit and discharged home

to wait in their own homes rather than a hospital bed for their procedure.

traditionally, many patients awaiting ‘urgent’ surgical procedures, such as

appendicectomy, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, evacuation of retained

products of conception (eRpC) or surgical abscess drainage, are not

prioritised for the emergency list and end up being fasted for a number of

days, occupying surgical beds until a slot becomes available.

there are a variety of opportunities for urgent patients to be scheduled:

• Dedicated 1st slot on emergency list: the patient attends the day unit at

7.30 a.m. and is prioritised as the 1st patient on the emergency list. Surgery

can be undertaken while the team is coordinating the day’s activity.

• planned slots on elective day surgery lists: high-v olume urgent

procedures can be accommodated on elective day surgery lists

by setting aside a number of dedicated slots, e.g. eRpC on a

gynaecology list.

• Running dedicated emergency day surgery lists: this enables the patient

to be discharged and brought back to an urgent day surgery list within

the next 48h, rather than spend 2d in hospital awaiting a theatre slot,

e.g. ‘hot’ laparoscopic cholecystectomy, management of urgent ureteric

stones.

• proactively filling any vacant slots on elective day surgery lists or vacant

lists with emergency day surgery patients: available theatre time, due

to elective cancellations or unanticipated early finish of day surgery

lists, can be utilised by early communication with emergency teams, e.g.

appendicectomy, management of ectopic pregnancy, testicular torsion.

## 頁面 506

DaY SURGeRY 485

Patient preparation and optimisation

patients should follow a sequential pathway and undergo preoperative as-

sessment by experienced day surgery nursing staff, according to set day case

criteria. Nurses should have the support of a consultant anaesthetist whom

they can approach for advice.

• Ideal practice is where patients attend assessment at the hospital on

the day of their surgical outpatient appointment. this is convenient

for patients, avoiding an additional hospital visit. It also ensures time to

complete any investigations and to review difficult patients.

• Some patient groups can undergo telephone assessment, in particular

those who are young, fit, on no medication and undergoing a procedure

that does not require specific tests. however, most patients benefit

from a face- to- face assessment.

• Successful day surgery requires anaesthetic departments to consider

patients who fall outside traditional guidelines and judge if they can be

made fit for day surgery.

• protocols can be used for preoperative investigations, but these should

be kept to those absolutely essential for the surgery, as very few

investigations in a day surgery pathway alter management.

• Clear instructions must be given to the patient regarding what will

happen on the day of surgery, what they need to bring on the day and

the organisation of someone to take them home and care for them

postoperatively. these instructions should be reinforced with clear

written information.

• Most cancellations on the day of surgery can be avoided by careful

preoperative assessment by experienced staff. those due to acute

illness, however, may still occur.

Day case patient selection criteria

Criteria need to be agreed with the anaesthetic department and will vary

according to the day surgery unit setting, e.g. more challenging patients and

procedures can be undertaken where the unit is integrated into a hospital

with all support services. Stand- alone units on isolated sites will need more

conservative criteria. however, patients deemed inappropriate for surgery

in these off- site units may still undergo a day surgery pathway via the main

hospital facility.

Health status (ASA) Day surgery is no longer reserved purely for the fit

and healthy. Most patients with stable medical conditions are appropriate

for day surgery, and many complex patients will do better in a day case

environment if they are managed appropriately, e.g. insulin-d ependent

diabetics, severe COpD patients, patients on dialysis or those who suffer

from epilepsy. If a patient with an unstable medical disease is presenting for

surgery, they should have their condition optimised before proceeding with

surgery and can then often be managed via a day case pathway. always try

to remember these two questions:

• What can we do to enable this patient to be managed as a day case?

• Would anything be done differently if the patient were to be treated

as an inpatient? If the answer to the question is no, then day surgery is

probably the optimal pathway.

## 頁面 507

486

486 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Age there is no upper age limit. physiological fitness should be considered,

rather than the chronological age, remembering that the elderly are usually

better managed in their home environment. Babies as young as 6w can

be managed on a day case basis (excluding premature infants <60w post-

gestational age due to the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)).

Obesity With appropriately skilled staff and equipment, even the morbidly

obese can be successfully managed as day cases. It can be the ideal option,

as early mobilisation reduces the risk of complications. there is no longer

any BMI limit for day surgery. assessment should include questions about

OSa as caution should be used with regard to postoperative opioid

medication if OSa is suspected (see % pp. 73–5).

Transport and social support all patients must be escorted home by a

responsible, informed adult and, in most cases, be adequately supervised

during their recovery at home for a minimum of 24h. Some units now

employ carers for patients without home support to enable them to

be treated as day cases. there is increasing acceptance that patients

undergoing more minor surgery (this excludes airway or laparoscopic

surgery) who are judged appropriate at preoperative assessment and

wish to go home alone are permitted to do so and this is preferable to an

overnight hospital admission. patients must have suitable home conditions

with adequate toilet facilities, and a telephone should be readily available for

advice in an emergency. patients must agree/u nderstand that they should

not drive, cycle, operate machinery or consume alcohol for 24h after their

anaesthetic. this advice must be contained in preoperative verbal and

written instructions given to the patient, and reinforced prior to discharge.

Geography though it is procedure- dependent, as a rule, the patient should

live within 1h travelling distance from a hospital which could deal with

complications arising from the surgery that has been undertaken. this may

not always be the hospital where the surgery was performed.

## 頁面 508

CONDUCt OF DaY CaSe aNaeStheSIa 487

Conduct of day case anaesthesia

the principles of day surgery anaesthesia are well established:

• premedication with oral analgesia

• Short- acting anaesthetic agents

• avoidance of emetogenic medication

• Multimodal analgesia

• Short- acting opioids for rescue analgesia if required

• Good postoperative analgesia.

Preoperative

• avoid sedative premedication, if at all possible. If necessary (usually

only for patients with behavioural issues), use pO midazolam, up to

0.5mg/ kg, in a little undiluted sweet fruit cordial (as it tastes awful).

• Routine use of antacid drugs is unnecessary; however, in those with a

history of regurgitation, ranitidine 300mg pO, or omeprazole 40mg pO,

is appropriate.

• Oral analgesics. paracetamol 1g and NSaIDs reach peak effect after

1– 2h and are a useful adjunct to anaesthesia, with very few side effects.

Controlled- release NSaIDs (e.g. ibuprofen 1600mg) preoperatively are

very effective and provide long- acting postoperative pain relief.

• patients should be encouraged to remain warm and hydrated

preoperatively. Delaying changing from street clothes into theatre

gowns until absolutely necessary minimises hypothermia, and

encouraging liberal consumption of water preoperatively minimises

rates of pONV. Increasing evidence supports free access to water

preoperatively rather than arbitrary ‘cut- off’ times after which a patient

must not drink, which are associated with excessive periods of fluid

deprivation.

Perioperative

• Short- acting agents should be used. tIVa is ideally suited to day surgery;

however, units have also had success with sevoflurane. avoid agents

likely to contribute to pONV such as NO or long- acting opioids (e.g.

2

morphine).

• For larger procedures, use incremental fentanyl, up to 2–4 micrograms/

kg in divided doses. IV morphine should be avoided.

• Consider NSaIDs, if not already given, and la for every suitable

patient/ operation.

• patients should be kept warm and hydrated with 1l of crystalloids

(15ml/k g for paediatric patients). this reduces the incidence of

dizziness and pONV and aids recovery.

• Whenever possible, use an lMa, avoiding intubation, muscle relaxants

and reversal agents. lMas for gynaecological laparoscopy and

reinforced lMas for wisdom tooth extraction can be used safely in

many circumstances.

• antiemetics are not indicated routinely, especially if emetogenic triggers

(such as NO, volatile anaesthesia or long- acting opioids) are avoided,

2

but should be reserved for treatment of any pONV or for prophylaxis

in those with a significant history of pONV or surgical procedures with

a high incidence of pONV (e.g. ovarian/ tubal surgery, squints, scrotal

surgery) (see % pp. 442–3).

## 頁面 509

488

488 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Postoperative

• Balanced analgesia with paracetamol, NSaIDs, la and short-a cting

opioids is usually adequate. If more analgesia is needed, it is imperative

to use it early; consider IV fentanyl 50– 100 micrograms.

• Give pO morphine or other agents such as tramadol if stronger

analgesia is required. Remember that morphine in doses above 0.1mg/

kg increases the admission rate.

• antispasmodic agents, such as hyoscine, and physical therapies, such as

hot water bottles, may help, particularly for cramping lower abdominal

pain following gynaecological surgery.

Postoperative nausea and vomiting

(See also % pp. 442–8.)

• a multifactorial approach to the prevention of pONV should be used.

the apfel scoring system may significantly overestimate the risk of

pONV if the anaesthetic techniques described above are employed.

patients experiencing pONV must be actively managed before

discharge home.

• For high- risk patients, la techniques or Ga using tIVa, avoidance of

opioids, multimodal analgesic therapy, good hydration (IV fluids) and

minimal fluid fast are appropriate. Dexamethasone 8mg, in combination

with cyclizine 50mg, or a 5- ht antagonist are effective prophylactic

3

agents. this is an approach that works well and leaves only a small

number of patients requiring rescue treatment postoperatively.

Regional anaesthesia

(See also % Chapter 40.)

the i use of ultrasound enables many procedures to be undertaken

under purely regional anaesthesia with huge efficiency gains, particularly

if entire lists are undertaken this way. It is reasonable to discharge pa-

tients with working plexus blocks, thus allowing the benefit of prolonged

postoperative analgesia. Remember that patients need special instructions

on the care of the anaesthetised part so as to avoid inadvertent damage.

this would include a sling for patients with brachial plexus blocks.

Local anaesthesia

Surgeons should be encouraged to use liberal infiltration of la for any in-

cision ‘if you cut it, block it’. For many procedures such as inguinal hernia

repair or breast cancer surgery, surgical infiltration is as effective as re-

gional anaesthesia. It can also be more efficient and associated with fewer

complications.

Specific blocks

Field block performed by the surgeon excellent for la hernia repair, as

provides postoperative analgesia and obviates the need for Ga. la for

inguinal surgery is best placed by the surgeon under direct vision. attempt

at ilioinguinal nerve block by anaesthetists has a high incidence of blockade

of the femoral nerve, with subsequent unplanned admission due to difficulty

mobilising.

## 頁面 510

CONDUCt OF DaY CaSe aNaeStheSIa 489

Spinals Shorter- acting spinal agents such as 1% chloroprocaine (40–

60min duration) and 2% hyperbaric prilocaine (90– 120min duration)

have revolutionised the ability to provide a day surgery spinal anaesthetic

service with rapid postoperative mobilisation. this has been pivotal in

the introduction of day case arthroplasty services to many units (see Fig.

18.2 for an example flow chart). If shorter- acting agents are unavailable,

consider reduced- dose spinals (5– 7.5mg of bupivacaine). this gives

a similar onset of anaesthesia with less motor block and a shorter

discharge time, compared with standard doses (4h vs 6h). Bupivacaine

0.25% (3– 3.5ml) has become widely used for day case joint replacement

surgery; however, it is important to use the racemic mixture, rather than

levobupivacaine which is associated with a more patchy, unreliable block

when used at lower concentrations.

Femoral blocks these are usually inappropriate due to difficulty mobilising

postoperatively; however, subsartorial blocks which block the sensory, but

not the motor, branch of the femoral nerve are ideal for procedures such as

anterior cruciate ligament repair, or unicondylar or total knee replacement.

Discharge drugs

all patients should have a supply of suitable oral postoperative analgesics at

home or be given them on discharge. there should be procedure-s pecific

analgesic protocols to ensure consistent prescribing between clinicians

(table 18.4). audit of postoperative pain scores should be undertaken to

ensure the protocols are appropriate.

Discharge criteria

• Stable vital signs.

• Fully awake and orientated.

• tolerating oral fluids.

• passing urine is only essential after specific procedures (e.g. urology,

gynaecology) or spinal/ caudal anaesthesia.

• ambulant.

• pain and nausea well controlled.

• Minimal bleeding or wound drainage.

Specific discharge criteria for regional techniques

Spinal anaesthesia

• Full recovery of motor power and proprioception

• the patient has passed urine.

Regional blocks

• Understanding of protection of partially blocked limb

• Instructions regarding when the block should have regressed and whom

to contact if it has not

• adequate mobility on crutches, if required.

## 頁面 511

490

490 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Procedure-targeted spinal anaesthesia

2% hyperbaric prilocaine and 1% isobaric chloroprocaine

PERINEAL SURGERY

Haemorrhoids, fissure, fistula,

Saddle block? abscess, EUA

Yes Prilocaine Perianal abscess

No 10–20mg Circumcision/meatoplasty

(0.5–1mL)

Vulval surgery

>T10 block?

GENERAL Epigastric/

Yes

umbilical hernia

No Prilocaine GYNAE Diagnostic

60mg+ laparoscopy

(3mL+)

UROLOGY Ureteroscopy

+/– stent and laser

>1 h?

Yes

Prilocaine GENERAL Inguinal/femoral

No 40–60mg hernia

(2–3mL) Recurrent or bilateral hernia

Chloroprocaine Bilateral varicose veins

40–50 mg ORTHO ACL/MPFL repair

(4–5mL)

GYNAE Vaginal repair

Colposuspension/colpocleisis

GENERAL Single varicose veins/RFA

veins lumps/bumps, inguinal hernia +/– vaginal hysterectomy

ORTHO Knee arthroscopy (incl bilat), UROLOGY TURP

ACL/MPFL repair, foot/ankle surgery

GYNAE Hysteroscopy D&C,

TVT, minor procedures

UROLOGY BNI, cysto/diathermy,

check cystoscopy

Fig. 18.2. protocol for use of short- acting spinal anaesthetic agents in day

surgery. Courtesy Dr Robbie erskine, Dr Gillian turner and eleanor erskine.

Discharge organisation

Written and verbal discharge information must be provided. It is essen-

tial that patients are given the contact number of someone in the hospital,

should they require advice overnight. this may be the day surgery unit

within opening hours and either a surgical ward or senior surgical nurse

overnight. It is not appropriate for patients to be directed to out- of- hours

Gp services or emergency departments.

## 頁面 512

CONDUCt OF DaY CaSe aNaeStheSIa 491

Table 18.4 example protocol for day surgery take- home analgesia

Expected pain Example procedures Analgesia protocol

None Cystoscopy None

Mild prostatic biopsy paracetamol 1g qds

Moderate Dental extractions paracetamol 1g qds

Mastectomy Ibuprofen 400mg qds

arthroscopy

Severe laparoscopic Co- codamol 30/ 500

cholecystectomy 2 tabs qds

laparoscopic hysterectomy Ibuprofen 400mg qds

hernia repair Macrogol one sachet bd

Postoperative admission

the most common reasons for overnight admission are:

• the patient not fulfilling discharge criteria before the unit closes

• Observation after surgical or anaesthetic complications

• Unexpectedly more extensive surgery

• Uncontrolled pain or pONV.

Overall, unanticipated admission rates will depend upon the surgical case

mix undertaken. With increasingly complex procedures entering the day

surgery arena, timely discharge is more challenging to achieve, and consid-

eration to the development of a procedure-s pecific anaesthetic guideline

is required. examples of procedures where this has been found useful in-

clude joint replacements, hysterectomy, laparoscopic cholecystectomy and

tonsillectomy.

Follow- up, audit and benchmarking

patient follow- up is an essential part of the day surgery pathway to en-

sure patients are comfortable and satisfied postoperatively. the most ef-

fective method of undertaking this is via a postoperative telephone service.

a structured questionnaire should be undertaken covering the following:

• postoperative pain score

• pONV score

• patient satisfaction

• Satisfaction with the day surgery pathway

• Requirement for any postoperative advice or support.

this service provides detailed audit information, analysis of which drives

continuous service improvement. It also provides the opportunity for pa-

tient support, should they have any queries or concerns following their

procedure.

## 頁面 513

492

492 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Further reading

association of anaesthetists, British association of Day Surgery (2019). Guidelines for day case sur-

gery 2019. M https:// anaesthetists.org/ portals/ 0/ Images/ Guidelines%20cover%20images/

Guideline_ day_ case_ surgery_ 2019.pdf?ver=2019- 05- 05- 075731- 563

Fox B (2019). Spinal Anaesthesia for Day Surgery Patients: A Practical Guide, 4th edn. london: British

association of Day Surgery.

Jackson I, McWhinnie D, Skues M (2012). The pathway to success— management of the

day surgical patient. M https:// publications.bads.co.uk/ the- pathway- to- success- - -

management- of- the- day- surgical- patient- 17- p.asp

Smith I, McWhinnie D, Jackson I, eds. (2012). Day Case Surgery (Oxford Specialist handbooks).

Oxford: Oxford University press.

association of anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (2010). Pre- operative assessment and patient

preparation— the role of the anaesthetist. london: association of anaesthetists of Great Britain

and Ireland.

Chung F, Mezei G (1999). adverse outcomes in ambulatory anesthesia. Can J Anaesth, 46, RI8– 26.

British association of Day Surgery. M http:// www.bads.co.uk [for updates, a series of handbooks

on topics referred to in this chapter, and new day surgery links].

Society for ambulatory anesthesia. M http:// www.sambahq.org

## 頁面 514

NeUROlOGICal DeteRMINatION OF Death 493

Neurological determination of death

Dying is a process. Death can be diagnosed when that process has pro-

gressed to the irreversible loss of the capacity for consciousness, combined

with the irreversible loss of the capacity to breathe.

the standard used for neurological determination of death (NDD) in

many countries is that of brain death. this requires the loss of all brain

function (cerebral and brainstem). In the UK, brainstem death is used for

NDD. In contrast to brain death, brainstem death does not require that all

brain functions have ceased, only that any functions that might persist do

not indicate any form of consciousness. the clinical determination of whole

brain death and brainstem death are the same and stressing the differences

between them results in unnecessary confusion and controversy.

• the 1° reason to confirm brainstem death is that it provides a legal

and ethical basis for the withdrawal of invasive ventilation. Secondly,

confirmation of brainstem death enables the donation of organs for

transplantation if that is consistent with the patient’s and their families’

wishes (deemed consent applies; see % pp. 497–502).

• the most common causes of brainstem death are traumatic brain

injury, intracranial haemorrhage and hypoxic brain injury. to diagnose

brainstem death, the patient needs to fulfil certain preconditions and

have absent brainstem reflexes.

• two doctors are required to determine death by neurological criteria.

the qualifications required of the doctors vary between jurisdictions,

but they must be familiar with, and competent at, brainstem testing. at

least one should be a consultant.

Preconditions for neurological determination of death

• patient comatose, apnoeic and dependent on mechanical ventilation.

• Coma caused by irreversible brain damage of a known aetiology.

• the patient must be normotensive (Map ≥60mmhg in an adult and an

age- appropriate Bp in children).

• the patient must be normothermic (temperature >34°C).

• Reversible causes for brainstem depression excluded: sedatives, muscle

relaxants, alcohol and metabolic or endocrine disturbances (severe

untreated hypothyroidism or hypoadrenalism) (table 18.5).

• absence of acute liver failure or decompensated chronic liver disease.

• If there is any doubt about the persisting effects of opioids or

benzodiazepines, an appropriate antagonist should be administered at

the time of examination or drug levels measured (thiopental <5mg/ l,

midazolam <10 micrograms/ l).

• Unless it is known for certain that neuromuscular- blocking medications

have not been administered, a pNS or other recognised method (e.g.

eMG) should always be used to confirm that neuromuscular conduction

is normal.

• It must be possible to examine all brainstem reflexes, with at least one

ear and one eye available for examination.

• It must be possible to perform an apnoea test. Severe hypoxic

respiratory failure or high cervical spine injury may preclude this.

## 頁面 515

494

494 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

• a period of observation is required from when the patient meets the

preconditions and has a GCS 3, with fixed pupils and absent cough, and

is apnoeic.

• Clinical testing should be delayed for 24h when the cause of coma

is hypoxic– ischaemic encephalopathy or if the patient has been

hypothermic.

Table 18.5 acceptable metabolic levels to fulfil preconditions of clinical testing*

Factor Acceptable range (mmol/ L)

Na+ 115– 160

K+ >2

Mg2+ 0.5– 3

phosphate 0.5– 3

Glucose 3– 20

Urea <40

* these are not prescriptive and should not replace clinical judgement, especially if there has

been rapid correction.

Testing for absence of brainstem responses

tests of brainstem reflexes should be performed only when the precondi-

tions are fulfilled.

• the pupils are fixed and there is no response to sharp changes in the

intensity of incident light. the pupils are usually dilated, but this is not

essential for the diagnosis.

• the corneal reflex is absent.

• there is no motor response within the trigeminal nerve distribution to

painful stimuli applied centrally or peripherally. Spontaneous and reflex

movements (spinal reflexes) may persist in brainstem-d ead patients.

• the oculovestibular reflex is absent. there is no eye movement in

response to the injection of 50ml of ice- cold water into the external

auditory meatus, with the head at 30° to the bed. Direct access to the

tympanic membrane should be verified using an otoscope. the eyes

should be observed for at least 1min after each injection.

• there is no gag in response to posterior pharyngeal stimulation.

• there is no cough reflex in response to a suction catheter passed down

the ett.

Confirmation of apnoea

this test is done last to avoid unnecessary hypercapnia or hypoxaemia,

should any of the other reflexes be present.

• the patient should be preoxygenated by ventilating with 100% O for

2

at least 5min and the minute ventilation reduced to achieve an end-t idal

paCO of 6kpa (45mmhg). etCO can be used to guide the start of

2 2

the apnoea test and when to measure an arterial paCO but does not

2

replace the pre- and post- arterial paCO.

2

## 頁面 516

NeUROlOGICal DeteRMINatION OF Death 495

• Check an aBG to confirm that paCO is at least 6kpa and the ph

2

is <7.4. In patients with chronic CO retention, the CO should be

2 2

allowed to rise such that the ph is <7.4 before commencing the

apnoea test.

• the patient is then disconnected from the ventilator and the ett is

attached to a self- inflating bag with at least 5cmhO of peep and 15l/

2

min of O flow. this provides apnoeic oxygenation and minimises

2

atelectasis.

• Observe the patient continuously for a minimum of 5min for any

respiratory movement. the paCO should be measured and should be

2

high enough to ensure an adequate stimulus to ventilation.

• the apnoea test is positive (absent breathing) if no spontaneous

respiration is observed and the paCO has risen by >0.5kpa.

2

• the ventilator is then reconnected with settings to allow gradual return

of the aBGs to the pretest level.

Paediatrics

the criteria for NDD in children over 2mo of age are the same as in adults.

• NDD by clinical examination in neonates <37w of post- conceptual age

is unreliable due to the immaturity of brainstem reflexes.

• Between 37w of post- conceptual age and 2mo of age, it is possible

to confirm death by neurological criteria, but caution is required and

specialist advice recommended.

• at least one of the doctors examining the child should be a

paediatrician.

ECMO

NDD testing may be performed on patients who are on eCMO.

• a guideline for performing this test is available from the Faculty of

Intensive Care Medicine and the Intensive Care Society of the UK.

Ancillary and confirmatory investigations

ancillary tests or confirmatory tests are not required in the UK. however, if

preconditions are not met and where a full neurological examination is not

possible (e.g. extensive facial trauma, inability to perform apnoea test due

to high cervical spine injury or hypoxia), it is essential to perform further

investigations.

• Investigations should be deferred until responsiveness, examinable

brainstem reflexes and breathing effort are all absent.

• Investigations may include neurophysiological demonstration of

loss of bioelectrical activity in the brain (e.g. eeG) and radiological

demonstration of absent cerebral blood flow or brain tissue perfusion

(e.g. Ct angiography, 4- vessel angiography, transcranial Doppler).

• the two testing doctors must determine the utility of additional

investigations and it is recommended they should seek further

professional opinion from other specialties and other expert centres,

where appropriate.

## 頁面 517

496

496 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Other considerations

• the tests must be performed twice, each by a different doctor.

• the diagnosis should not normally be considered until at least 6h after

the onset of an apnoeic coma or 24h after the restoration of circulation

if the cause was a cardiac arrest.

• If prolonged hypothermia (<34°C for >6h) has occurred, the

tests should be performed at least 24h after the restoration of

normothermia.

• Death is confirmed after the 2nd set of tests, but in the UK, the time of

death is recorded as the completion of the 1st set.

• the coroner (procurator Fiscal in Scotland) should be informed in the

usual referral manner. If organ donation is contemplated, this should be

discussed.

• Care of the relatives is essential at this time, irrespective of whether the

patient is to be an organ donor or not.

• Observations that are incompatible with the diagnosis of brainstem

death include seizures, decorticate and decerebrate posturing and limb

movements elicited with stimulation in the cranial nerve distribution

• Observations that are compatible with brainstem death include spinal

reflexes, blushing and the absence of diabetes insipidus.

• Spinal reflexes can be spontaneous or in response to stimulus. they do

not occur in the motor distribution of the cranial nerves or in response

to stimulation within the cranial nerve distribution.

Circulatory determination of death

For organ donation following circulatory determination of death, the fol-

lowing observations are required:

• the person responsible for confirming death must observe apnoea,

unconsciousness and the absence of pulsatility on an arterial line trace

or of electrical activity on eCG for 5min.

• after 5min of continued cardiorespiratory arrest, death is confirmed

if there is no pupillary response to light, no corneal response and no

motor response to supraorbital pressure.

Further reading

Smith M (2018). Brain death. In: Bersten aD, handy JM (eds). Oh’s Intensive Care Manual, 8th edn.

elsevier. pp. 673– 80.

Smith M (2015). Brain death: the United Kingdom perspective. Semin Neuro, 35, 145– 51.

doi:10.1055/ s- 0035- 1547534

Oram J, Murphy p (2011). Diagnosis of death. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 11, 77– 81.

doi:10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mkr008

academy of Medical Royal Colleges (2008). A code of practice for the diagnosis and confirmation

of death. M https:// www.aomrc.org.uk/ reports- guidance/ ukdec- reports- and- guidance/

code- practice- diagnosis- confirmation- death/

## 頁面 518

ORGaN DONatION SURGeRY aFteR BRaIN Death 497

Organ donation surgery after

brain death

procedure procurement of donor organs via midline laparotomy and

median sternotomy

time Up to 6h, depending on which organs are retrieved

pain N/ a

position Supine

Blood loss large fluid losses likely, X- match 4 units

practical IppV, central venous line and arterial line

techniques

transplantation of donated organs to selected patients with end- stage

organ failure is a successful and cost-e ffective therapy, improving both

quality and duration of life. however, demand for donor organs continues

to exceed supply. Organ donation discussions should be considered as a

usual part of ‘end- of- life care’.

there are few absolute contraindications to donation (e.g. transmissible

spongiform encephalopathies, disseminated metastatic malignancy), but

many relative contraindications, and so it is recommended that all potential

donors are identified and discussed early with the organ donation agency

before being ruled out and prior to any family discussions about donation.

legislative changes in the UK mean that deemed consent now applies for all

potential donors over 18y old who have lived in the UK for >12mo. Families

must be consulted and their objections to donation must be respected.

the characteristics of deceased donors continue to change, with relative

stability in the number of donors after brain death (DBD) and ongoing in-

crease in donors after circulatory death (DCD) (see % pp. 501–2).

there are tending to be fewer donors after traumatic brain injury and

more from CVe, hypoxic–i schaemic encephalopathy and other non-

traumatic conditions.

the number of donors with comorbidities or potentially reversible organ

dysfunction is increasing. this is a result of changes in admission criteria to

the ICU and end-o f- life practices, and more liberal acceptance by transplant

services of these donors.

Brainstem death is associated with a series of predictable physiological

changes that, if inadequately managed, can lead to significant deterioration

in organ function.

Pathophysiology of brainstem death

• early, short-l ived, massive sympathetic outflow occurs during brainstem

herniation, causing hypertension, tachycardia, myocardial dysfunction,

impaired organ perfusion and tissue ischaemia.

• autonomic collapse results in a reduction in CO, loss of vasomotor

tone, hypotension and atropine- resistant bradycardia. If untreated,

hypoperfusion of all organs will occur. tissue ischaemia can trigger

a systemic inflammatory response that contributes to cardiovascular

instability.

## 頁面 519

498

498 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

• Deterioration in lung function may occur due to neurogenic pulmonary

oedema and acute lung injury (alI).

• endocrine changes are variable in timing and severity. posterior pituitary

function is commonly lost. Reduced aDh secretion leads to neurogenic

diabetes insipidus, with hypovolaemia and electrolyte disorders (i Na+,

d K+, d phosphate).

• Some anterior pituitary function may remain, but a fall in t and t

3 4

levels may cause myocardial dysfunction and a global shift to anaerobic

metabolism.

• hyperglycaemia is due to both reduced circulating insulin and insulin

resistance.

• Release of tissue fibrinolytic agents and plasminogen activators from the

necrotic brain causes a coagulopathy.

• hypothermia occurs due to reduced whole body metabolism,

hypothalamic dysfunction and loss of large volumes of dilute urine

in untreated diabetes insipidus, and from the inability to shiver and

vasoconstrict.

Prior to donation

Maintaining physiological support to a patient until brainstem testing is

undertaken preserves the opportunity for a discussion with the family about

the potential for organ donation.

• typically, once a potential donor is identified, there will be several

conversations between the hospital staff, the organ donation agency

and the family.

• In anticipation of cardiovascular instability as brainstem death occurs, a

multilumen central line (internal jugular or subclavian is preferable), one

large peripheral IV line for rapid infusion (14G or 16G) and an arterial

line (upper limb preferable) should be sited.

• Check that brainstem death has been confirmed and that consent for

organ donation has been obtained from the relatives and the coroner.

• emphasis in management changes from cerebral resuscitation to optimal

organ perfusion and oxygenation. When sympathetic hyperactivity

occurs, use a short-a cting β- blocker (e.g. esmolol) to treat severe

hypertension (Map >130mmhg) and tachycardia. Do not use long-

acting agents or aim for full β- blockade.

• at the time of brainstem death, sympathetic tone is lost and

hypotension occurs. Give a volume challenge of resuscitation fluid

(500ml to 1l) and be prepared to start vasopressin (0.01–0 .04

units/ min). Some countries use noradrenaline as their 1st choice of

vasopressor.

• large fluid volumes can be lost through untreated diabetes insipidus

and unrecognised blood loss. ensure adequate intravascular volume

resuscitation using appropriate clinical assessments and investigations.

• It is not necessary to raise the CVp if Bp and other perfusion goals are

met. avoid fluid overload in potential lung donors as this reduces the

number of donor lungs that can be retrieved.

• If hypotension persists despite adequate fluid resuscitation and

treatment of vasoplegic shock, an inotrope may be required. there is

little evidence to justify one specific agent over another.

## 頁面 520

ORGaN DONatION SURGeRY aFteR BRaIN Death 499

• If inotropic requirements remain high, search for blood loss, sepsis or

cardiac dysfunction. If available and ICU staff are familiar with their use,

serial echocardiography, continuous tOe or paFC may be helpful in

guiding therapy.

• patients on vasopressin may still require desmopressin (DDaVp®) to

control diabetes insipidus as this has greater antidiuretic effect. Start

with a dose of 4 micrograms and repeat if urine output remains >3ml/

kg/ h.

• lung function is commonly abnormal due to direct lung injury,

pulmonary oedema, atelectasis and pneumonia. lung donation is usually

possible if paO >40kpa on 100% O and 5cmhO of peep.

2 2 2

• Minimise ventilator- induced lung injury by ventilating with V of

T

6– 8ml/ kg. Use at least 5cmhO peep, the lowest FiO to maintain

2 2

O saturations of >92%, and ventilate according to the targets in

2

table 18.6.

• Continue regular chest physiotherapy, 2- hourly suctioning and turns.

• thromboprophylaxis, infection control measures and oral hygiene

should be continued.

• enteric feeding may reduce inflammation and have beneficial effects

in the transplanted organs, but if gastric aspirates are high, the risk of

aspiration is i.

• prevent hypothermia by using warmed IV fluids and warming blankets.

• the use of hormone therapy with t replacement, methylprednisolone

3

and vasopressin varies among transplant centres. their use should be

guided by the local retrieval team or in- house protocols.

• Correct i Na+ with 5% glucose in water. i Na+ (Na+ >155mmol/ l) in

the donor has been associated with worse outcomes for liver transplant

recipients. aim for serum Na+ of 135– 150mmol/ l.

• Use 1ml/ kg/h maintenance fluid as 5% glucose in water. Resuscitation

fluids (e.g. 0.9% sodium chloride, plasmalyte® 148) are not maintenance

fluids and their continued use may lead to oedema, hyperosmolarity and

organ dysfunction.

• d K+ can occur during brainstem death and increase the risk of cardiac

dysrhythmias. Replace K+ IV and aim for serum K+ of 4.0– 4.9mmol/ l.

• Maintain glucose between 4 and 12mmol/ l, with insulin as required to

prevent glycosuria.

• Clotting abnormalities should be corrected with clotting factors and

platelets.

• FBC, coagulation screen and lFts should be measured at least daily.

• Blood gases (with hb, Na+, K+, glucose and lactate), as well as serum

urea and creatinine, should be measured 6- hourly (more frequently if

clinically indicated).

• Order CXR, eCG and echocardiography for potential heart/l ung

donors. transplant teams may request other investigations, e.g.

coronary angiogram or Ct thorax.

• target physiological parameters are outlined in table 18.6.

## 頁面 521

500

500 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Table 18.6 target parameters for organ retrieval

Target parameters

Map 60– 80mmhg

pulse 60– 120/ min

Cardiac index >2.1l/ min/ m2

Core temperature 36– 37.5°C

hb >70g/l for CV stable donor

>90g/l for unstable donor

SpO

2

>95% with lowest FiO2 to maintain paO2 >10kpa

V 6– 8ml/ kg

T

paCO NhS guidelines: 5–6.5kpa as long as ph>7.25

2

aNZICS and US guidelines: 4.7–6.0kpa

(35–45mmhg)

plateau pressure <30cmhO

2

Urine output 0.5– 2ml/ kg/ h

Perioperative

• the WhO Surgical Safety Checklist (or similar) should be applied.

• During the organ retrieval operation, the anaesthetist should aim to

maintain physiological stability in the donor to ensure the donated

organs are in optimal condition for transplantation.

• Standard monitoring is required, plus an arterial line, core temperature

and urine output.

• patients who are brain-d ead cannot experience pain and lack

consciousness and so a true ‘anaesthetic’ is not required. however,

spinal cord function remains intact and administration of NMBas, volatile

agents and, at times, an opioid is required to prevent spinal reflex motor

responses and reduce spinal sympathetic responses (tachycardia and

hypertension) that can occur spontaneously or during surgical stimulation.

• Opioids are sometimes given to suppress catecholamine-m ediated

sympathetic activity, although they may not be sufficient. GtN or a β-

blocker may also be needed to treat hypertension.

• Spinal reflexes in the limbs can be distressing for observers and could

potentially lead to contamination of the operative field. excessive

sympathetic responses can result in myocardial injury or excessive

bleeding, with subsequent haemodynamic instability and detrimental

effects on graft function.

• large and frequent haemodynamic fluctuations occur due to compression

of the IVC, manipulation of the adrenal glands and blood/fl uid loss.

hypotension is treated with crystalloids, blood products, vasopressin

infusion and inotropes as indicated. there is no role for synthetic colloids as

these may impair graft function. have 4 units of RBCs available in theatre.

• Broad- spectrum antibiotics are given as per local transplant protocol.

• Cardiothoracic and abdominal surgeons work concurrently to mobilise

the organs.

## 頁面 522

ORGaN DONatION SURGeRY aFteR BRaIN Death 501

• IV heparinisation (300 units/k g) should be administered on request

of the surgeons prior to aortic cross- clamping. this is to prevent clot

formation in retrieved organs.

• Following aortic cross- clamp and the start of perfusion fluids,

mechanical ventilation ceases and the anaesthetist is no longer required.

• Organs are retrieved in the order of the heart, lungs and then liver.

• the abdominal surgical team continues to operate in circulatory arrest,

retrieving the kidneys, pancreas and blood vessels.

Special considerations

Ongoing care of the patient includes maintenance of their dignity and

showing empathy and sensitivity in dealing with the donor’s family.

• Good communication within an atmosphere of mutual respect and trust

is paramount throughout the management of the potential organ donor.

• the quality of care afforded to the multiorgan donor could affect the

outcome of >6 recipients.

• In the event of a cardiac arrest in theatre, CpR should be commenced

as procurement of the liver and kidneys can still proceed rapidly with

cross- clamping of the aorta at the diaphragm and infusion of cold

preservation solution into the distal aorta and portal vein.

Donation after circulatory death

Retrieval of organs for the purpose of transplantation can occur under spe-

cific circumstances when death is confirmed using cardiorespiratory criteria

(see % p. 496).

• DCD was previously referred to as donation after cardiac death or non-

heart- beating organ donation.

• Relative contributions of DBD and DCD vary around the world. DCD

has i significantly in the UK in the last decade and now accounts for

almost 40% of deceased organ donors.

• the liver, kidneys, heart, pancreas and lungs are all potentially donatable

after DCD.

• DCD may be considered only once a decision has been made that it is

in the best interests of the patient to withdraw life-s ustaining therapies.

this is followed by discussions with the organ donation agency and with

the patient’s family.

• Managing a potential DCD donor through the donation pathway is a

complex process.

• When life- sustaining therapies are withdrawn, standard end-o f- life care

continues, including administration of medications to prevent suffering.

the location where this occurs will be determined by local practice.

• If lung donation is to occur, it is permissible to reintubate the donor to

prevent aspiration. a single recruitment manoeuvre may be required,

but repeat insufflation of the lungs is not appropriate.

• If death does not occur within the time frame to allow organ donation,

there should be an established plan for ongoing end-o f- life cares. the

option of tissue donation should remain.

## 頁面 523

502

502 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Further reading

australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society (2019). The statement on death and

organ donation, 4th edn. M https:// www.anzics.com.au/ wp- content/ uploads/ 2020/ 07/

aNZICS- Statement- on- Death- and- Organ- Donation- edition- 4.pdf

Martin- loeches I, Sandiumenge a, Charpentier J, et al. (2019). Management of donation after brain

death in the ICU:the potential donor is identified, what’s next? Intensive Care Med, 45, 322– 30.

doi:10.1007/ s00134- 019- 05574- 5

pasternak JJ (2019). Neuroanesthesiology update. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol, 31, 178– 98. doi:10.1097/

aNa.000000000000058

Streat SJ (2018). Organ donation. In: Bersten aD, handy JM (eds). Oh’s Intensive Care Manual, 8th

edn. elsevier. pp. 1205– 14.

anderson ta, Bekker p, Vagefi pa (2015). anesthetic considerations in organ procurement surgery:

a narrative review. Can J Anesth, 62, 529– 39. doi:10.1007/ s12630- 015- 0345- 8

Manara aR, Murphy pG, O’Callaghan G (2012). Donation after circulatory death. Br J Anaesth, 108

(S1), i108– 21. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aer357

McKeown DW, Bonser RS, Kellum Ja (2012). Management of the heart- beating brain- dead organ

donor. Br J Anaesth, 108, i96– 107. doi:10.1093/ bja/ aer351

academy of Medical Royal Colleges. UK Donation Ethics Committee. M https:// www.aomrc.org.uk/

all- publications/ reports- guidance/ ukdec/

NhS Blood and transplant Service. M https:// www.odt.nhs.uk/

## 頁面 524

MaJOR aNaeSthetIC MIShapS: What t O DO IN the aFteRMath 503

Major anaesthetic mishaps: what to do

in the aftermath

Over the course of a career, most anaesthetists will experience at least one

catastrophic anaesthetic mishap which will result in either death or major

injury for the patient.

the psychological consequences of this are variable. Whether a death is

‘anticipated’ or ‘unexpected’ is not relevant, as any death, serious injury or

‘near miss’ in theatre can have a profound and potentially lasting psycho-

logical impact on the anaesthetist.

Immediate actions in the operating theatre

Contact a senior colleague

a consultant anaesthetist should be involved as soon as possible. these are

rare events which carry heavy emotional loads and the actions required in

the aftermath are unfamiliar to most. You will need help and this must be

provided.

Clinical notes Detailed, truthful and ideally contemporaneous notes of the

event should be recorded. During a resuscitation, this task may be allocated

to another member of the team, but it is essential the anaesthetist records

a full account as soon as possible with a time and date. this record should

include: details of preoperative discussions, the patient’s premorbid

condition, how the emergency was recognised and treated and the

anaesthetic record annotated as necessary.

If possible, keep an encrypted copy of your clinical notes with additional

information (your thought processes and opinions), as medicolegal events

take time and your memory may fade.

Caring for the patient If the patient has died, this needs to be certified.

all intraoperative deaths must be reported to the coroner (england and

Wales) or the procurator Fiscal (Scotland). although lines, tubes and other

equipment should typically remain in place, the patient can be cleaned,

and wounds sutured closed and dressed, in preparation for viewing by the

family.

If the patient has not died, the anaesthetist should follow up on the pro-

gress of the patient. the patient will now be under the 1° care of another

team (likely ICU) and the anaesthetist’s role is to show appropriate interest

and empathy for their wellbeing, but they should not get involved in treat-

ment decisions, prognostication or independent discussions with the family.

Isolate equipment and drugs If there is concern that equipment or

medications were the cause of the catastrophe or if the cause is unknown,

then all procedural equipment, medications and syringes must be isolated

and stored for subsequent investigations. If there is concern the theatre or

anaesthetic machine have contributed to the event, the theatre should be

closed pending investigation.

## 頁面 525

504

504 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Caring for the family a formal meeting with the family needs to be arranged

immediately. Bad news must not be broken over the phone, although they

should be informed there has been a complication and that they need

to come to the hospital immediately. It is advisable they bring a support

person. If english is not the family’s first language, a translator must be used.

Breaking bad news can be challenging, especially for those who do not

do it very often. this involves a team approach and should include senior

members of the anaesthetic, nursing and surgical teams.

prior to meeting with the family, a brief premeeting should occur with

the attendees to identify who will be the 1° spokesperson; if the patient has

survived, this role may be most appropriately performed by the intensivist

now caring for the patient. at the premeeting, a summary of the events and

facts to be discussed should be agreed upon. Information that is unknown

should be acknowledged.

the meeting should take place in a quiet room where interruptions will

not occur. all members of the team should be introduced, as well as all

family members. It is important the bad news is delivered succinctly at the

beginning, in easy- to- understand, non- medical language. apologising to the

family that this event has occurred is not an admission of guilt, but a sign of

both empathy and caring and may provide comfort to a grieving family. a

bad news meeting can be emotionally draining for all concerned and only

a small proportion of the information presented may be retained. If the

family asks questions to which you do not know the answer, reply honestly

and tell them if and how you will find out this information. a record of the

meeting must be documented in the clinical notes and should include who

attended, what was covered and what follow-u p is planned.

Caring for the team Ideally, after a major event, the theatre should be

immediately closed and subsequent cases cancelled or performed by

another team. a ‘hot’ debriefing session should be facilitated as soon as

possible. this allows staff to talk about what has happened and aims to

defuse emotions. It is also used to let staff know what other resources

are available to them, e.g. counselling or further more formal debriefing

sessions.

Caring for the anaesthetist It is essential that the anaesthetic department

provides support for the anaesthetist.

Surveys reveal >70% of anaesthetists who experience a catastrophic

perioperative event will have a high degree of emotional impact, experi-

encing guilt, anxiety, sleeplessness, fear of judgement by colleagues and of

litigation, anger and reliving the event.3 they may also suffer from phys-

ical effects such as tiredness, muscle tension and nausea. these are a nat-

ural consequence of such an event but should lessen within a week or so.

Depending on the event and the individual, time off work to emotionally

recover may be helpful and on return to work, additional support may be

needed.

Support from a mentor should be sought or arranged by the clinical lead

as soon as possible. Discussing the events in an open, non-j udgemental

manner can assist the anaesthetist in coming to terms with what has

## 頁面 526

MaJOR aNaeSthetIC MIShapS: What t O DO IN the aFteRMath 505

happened. professional psychological support may also be required and the

anaesthetist should be assisted in accessing this. Occupational health may

need to be notified. a 2nd ‘cold’ debrief with all team members may be

useful.

Notifying other staff members It is important to remember the other health

professionals who have been caring for the patient, e.g. ward nurses and

house officers, who should be told directly rather than hearing it through

the ‘hospital grapevine’. the patient’s Gp should also be advised.

Formal investigations and medicolegal considerations Following a major

anaesthetic catastrophe, one or more investigations may take place. any

doctor who is involved should assist with these investigations in order

to identify the cause of the event and whether lessons can be learnt to

prevent further events occurring. the hospital will provide legal advice to

the individual doctor, but it is recommended that the anaesthetist notifies

their own medical defence organisation as soon as possible.

Mortality and morbidity meeting this should be chaired by a senior

anaesthetist and should be undertaken in a manner so as to learn lessons

from the incident, as opposed to apportioning blame. It may be most useful

to do this once other investigations have been completed and the cause

is known.

Internal enquiry/ root cause analysis With unexpected serious incidents, it is

extremely likely an internal enquiry will be undertaken. this will typically

involve the anaesthetist being interviewed and giving a statement. the

aim of this sort of enquiry is to identify any processes, system failures

or other weaknesses in order to prevent the event occurring again.

however, disciplinary actions can potentially follow, and so notifying your

medical defence organisation is recommended. they will provide you with

advice and representation as needed. It is also wise to take a mentor or

trusted colleague along to provide support, as these investigations can add

considerable stress.

Coronial inquest all deaths under anaesthesia or related to an operation

require referral to the coroner (or the procurator Fiscal in Scotland).

Inquests may take place months after the death and so good record-k eeping

is vital.

Medical Council investigation If there are concerns about a doctor’s

performance or competence during a critical incident, the General Medical

Council (GMC) should be notified. the GMC will inform the individual

if a complaint has been received and ask them to respond. Following an

initial investigation, the GMC may determine no further action is required,

issue a formal warning, agree undertakings with the individual to address

a problem in their practice or refer the case to the Medical practioners

tribunal Service.

## 頁面 527

506

506 ChapteR 18 Specific circumstances

Criminal prosecution police investigations are unusual. they occur if there are

suspicious circumstances, if it is felt that a clinician has been grossly negligent

or as a recommendation following a coronial inquest. any communications

with the police should be done in conjunction with your medical defence

organisation. these investigations are invariably extremely slow and can

take months or even years to complete. any doctor involved in this must

be offered support as this process is incredibly stressful.

Civil litigation Following a major anaesthetic mishap, a civil case for negligence

can potentially be brought against the doctor or the hospital. this is an

exceedingly slow process and can drag on for years.

Further reading

Clegg I, MacKinnon R (2014). Strategies for handling the aftermath of intraoperative death. Contin

Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 14, 159– 62. doi:10.1093/ bjaceaccp/ mkt050

association of anaesthetists (2005). Catastrophes in anaesthetic practice— dealing with the aftermath.

M http:// dx.doi.org/ 10.21466/ g.CIap.2005

Bacon aK, Morris RW, Runciman WB, et al. (2005). Crisis management during anaesthesia: re-

covering from a crisis. Qual Saf Health Care, 14, e25. doi:10.1136/ qshc.2002.004333

White SM (2003). Death on the table. Anaesthesia 58, 515– 19. doi:10.1046/ j.1365- 2044.2003.03241.x

aitkenhead aR (1997). anaesthetic disasters: handling the aftermath. Anaesthesia, 52, 477– 82.

References

3 Gazoni FM, amato pe, Malik ZM, et al. (2012). the impact of perioperative catastrophes on an-

esthesiologists: results of a national survey. Anesth Analg, 114, 596– 603. doi:10.1213/ aNe.0b013

e318227524e

