# Chapter 20: Thoracic Surgery 胸腔外科麻醉

## 頁面 550

Chapter 20 552299
Thoracic surgery
Charlotte Earnshaw and Kajan Kamalanathan
General principles 530
Enhanced recovery after surgery 532
Miscellaneous thoracic procedures 533
Isolation of the lungs 535
Management of one- lung ventilation 538
Rigid bronchoscopy and stent insertion 540
Superior/ cervical mediastinoscopy and endobronchial
ultrasound 541
Lung surgery: wedge resection, lobectomy and
pneumonectomy 542
Lung volume reduction surgery, bullectomy and endobronchial
valves 544
Drainage of empyema and decortication 546
Repair of bronchopleural fistula 547
Pleurectomy/ pleurodesis 549
Oesophagectomy 551
Chest injury 553
See also
% Thoracoscopic sympathectomy p. 607
% First rib resection p. 608
% Trache oesophageal fistula p. 936
% Inhaled foreign body p. 947
% Chest injuries pp. 553–5


---

## 頁面 551

530
530 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
General principles
Successful thoracic anaesthesia requires the ability to control ventilation of
the patient’s two lungs independently, management of the shared lung and
airway and a clear understanding of planned surgery.
Long-t erm smoking, bronchial carcinoma, pleural effusion, cardiac dis-
ease, oesophageal obstruction and cachexia are all common and can signifi-
cantly reduce the cardiorespiratory physiological reserve.
General considerations
• Discuss planned procedure and potential problems with the surgeon.
• Smoking cessation, optimising respiratory function and cardiovascular
fitness in preparation for surgery reduce perioperative morbidity.
• Place patients on an ERaS pathway at time of referral (see % pp. 44).
• The lateral decubitus position, with the operating table ‘broken’ to
separate the ribs, is used for the majority of procedures.
• Increasingly, cases are done by video- assisted thoracoscopic surgery
(VaTS).
• Postoperative mechanical ventilation stresses pulmonary suture lines
and increases air leaks and risk of chest infection; avoid, if possible.
• Minimise respiratory dysfunction by providing good analgesia and
physiotherapy. Patients go to hDU/s pecialist ward postoperatively.
• Postoperative O is routine to compensate for i V/ Q mismatch.
2
Warmed humidified 40% O via a face mask is recommended after
2
pulmonary surgery.
General preoperative assessment considerations
• Pay attention to functional status and cardiorespiratory reserve.
• Patients with significant cardiac disease form a high-r isk group.
• Discuss results of CXR and CT scans with the surgeon, focusing
on airway problems making DLT placement problematic, tumours
impinging on the chest wall and crossing fissures or vessels.
Preoperative assessment for lung resection
Risk assessment is based upon history, examination and assessment of func-
tional status, in combination with spirometry, tests of diffusion capacity (e.g.
DLCO) and calculation of Thoracoscore.
• The Thoracoscore gives an estimate of mortality risk based on a
number of variables (e.g. demographics, degree of dyspnoea and
comorbidities, performance status and type of surgery). It is especially
useful in the consent process. a multidisciplinary team approach is
essential and should involve the patient, anaesthetist, surgeon, clinical
nurse specialists, respiratory physician and radiologist.
• Patients may be classified as:1,2
• Clinically fit— good exercise tolerance, normal spirometry: accept for
surgery
• Major medical problems, minimal exercise capacity, grossly impaired
PFTs: consider alternative treatment
• Reduced exercise capacity (shortness of breath climbing two flights of
stairs) and abnormal spirometry, with or without moderate coexisting
disease: further assessment and careful evaluation of risks/b enefits of
surgery.


---

## 頁面 552

GEnERaL PRInCIPLES 531
• PFTs (see % p. 164) are often used to determine suitability for lung
resection surgery by estimating the postoperative lung function. Put
the results in the context of the patient’s general health and proposed
operation.
• Spirometry should be performed in addition to tests of diffusion
capacity (e.g. DLCO). Patients with diffuse alveolar lung disease can
have severely impaired gas transfer with relatively normal spirometry.
• Predicted postoperative (ppo) value of the PFT results is calculated by
the following formula: ppo = preoperative value × (19 – number of
segments resected)/ 19.
• If preoperative DLCO or ppoFEV is <40% predicted normal, the
1
patient should undergo CPET prior to surgery.
• CPET assesses VOmax which is used to inform the risk of
2
perioperative morbidity and mortality. Patients with a VOmax 10–
2
15mL/k g/ min are higher risk and should have postoperative hDU
admission. VOmax <10mL/ kg/ min are very high risk and surgery
2
may not be appropriate— further discussion is needed with the
multidisciplinary team and with the patient.
• all patients undergoing pneumonectomy or bilobectomy should
have CPET, echocardiography and a postoperative hDU admission.
Ventilation scans may be used to assess for non-f unctional lung (e.g.
atelectasis beyond an obstructing tumour). all patients with an active
cardiac condition should undergo cardiology review.
Analgesia
• Chronic pain syndrome after thoracic surgery occurs in 25–6 0% of
patients and the risk is i by high- intensity postoperative pain, so optimal
analgesia is essential.
• Inadequate analgesia increases the neurohumoral stress response,
impairing mobilisation and respiration and increasing complications.
• Combining opioid- sparing agents such as paracetamol, nSaIDs,
clonidine, magnesium, ketamine, glucocorticoids and a regional block is
recommended.3
• Regional anaesthesia typically involves surgically performed internal
intercostal nerve blocks alongside a paravertebral catheter for both
open and video- assisted thoracotomy (equivalent analgesic efficacy to
epidurals, but associated with fewer adverse events and may be better
suited to patients taking anticoagulants or in renal failure).
• Continuous postoperative infusion of levobupivacaine 0.375% for 48–
72h at 0.1mL/ kg/h via the paravertebral catheter is advised.
• Limiting the use of PCas aids enhanced recovery and VaTS procedures
are generally less painful.
• Thoracic epidural may be necessary for bilateral procedures (match the
level of block to that of the incision— usually T5/ 6 or T6/ 7).4
• Perineural catheters and regional analgesia into the serratus anterior or
erector spinae plane can be considered for single-p ort VaTS and also
provide good analgesia for rib fractures (see % pp. 995–6).


---

## 頁面 553

532
532 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Enhanced recovery after surgery
an ERaS pathway is initiated at referral and follows the patient to discharge.
It encompasses multiple elements that, when delivered in combination, im-
prove patient outcome. attenuation of the stress response and organ dys-
function reduces length of stay and complications.
Preoperative recommendations
• Patient engagement, education and psychological preparation are
paramount to improving motivation and compliance with pulmonary
rehabilitation programmes and reducing postoperative pain.5
• assessment of nutritional status and weight loss. Prescribe oral
nutritional supplements for malnourished or at-r isk patients.
• Smoking cessation and reducing alcohol consumption 4w preoperatively
reduces pulmonary complications and risk of death.
• Identify anaemic patients and correct iron deficiency. Blood transfusion
has been shown to reduce lung cancer survival, but if unavoidable,
preoperative transfusion is preferable to intraoperative.
• Prehabilitation programmes for those with borderline lung function or
poor exercise capacity improve physiological reserve.
• avoid starvation and consider carbohydrate loading.
• Minimise postoperative respiratory dysfunction with good analgesia and
physiotherapy. Preoperative sedative agents should be avoided.
Perioperative recommendations
• appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis, skin preparation and temperature
monitoring are mandatory. avoid hypothermia.
• a combination of regional and general anaesthetic techniques permits
early extubation. Most volatiles weakly inhibit hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction, but with little impact at ≤1 MaC. Lung- protective
ventilation should be employed (see % p. 170).
• POnV should be avoided (see % pp. 442–7). higher- risk patients
should be given multimodal antiemetic prophylaxis.
• aim for euvolaemia (dry lung) with balanced crystalloid; avoid being
over- restrictive (2– 3mL/ kg/h not been shown to be detrimental).
• Minimally invasive surgery is preferred; avoid external suction on chest
tube, if possible.
• Warmed, humidified 40% O to compensate for i V/ Q mismatch after
2
pulmonary surgery. O 3L/ min via nasal cannulae is better tolerated and
2
satisfactory for most other patients.
• Early mobilisation, physiotherapy, incentive spirometry and mechanical
and pharmacological VTE prophylaxis are all recommended, if possible.
• new-o nset aF or atrial flutter is common postoperatively, with an
incidence of 12%. β- blockers should be continued; replace magnesium
and consider preoperative diltiazem or postoperative amiodarone.
Digoxin should not be used.


---

## 頁面 554

MISCELLanEOUS ThORaCIC PROCEDURES 533
Miscellaneous thoracic procedures
(See Table 20.1.)
Table 20.1 Miscellaneous thoracic procedures
Operation Description Time Position/ Notes
(pain) approach
Fibreoptic Visual 5– 10min Supine Ga rarely used.
broncho- inspection (+) Single- lumen tube
scopy of tracheo- (SLT) (8– 9mm)
bronchial with bronchoscopy
tree ± biopsy diaphragm on angle
and bronchial piece. IPPV with
brushings/ relaxant appropriate to
lavage duration. Expect high
airway pressures while
scope in ETT. Suction
can empty breathing
system. Surgeon may
perform via DLT at start
of a major case
Lung biopsy Diagnostic 30– 60min VaTS (open DLT and one- lung
sampling of (+++/ procedure ventilation (OLV)
lung tissue ++++) becoming facilitate VaTS
for localised rare) procedures. Patients
or diffuse with diffuse disease can
abnormality have very poor lung
function. Minor blood
loss, G&S: X-m atch if
anaemic
Oesopha- Visual 5– 20min Supine Regurgitation risk, so
goscopy inspection of (– / +) RSI advised. SLT on
and dilation oesophagus left side of mouth—
(O&D) via rigid or watch for airway
fibreoptic obstruction and ETT
scope ± displacement during
dilation of procedure. Flexible
stricture oesophagoscopy often
done under IV sedation
Oesophageal Endoscopic 10– 30min Supine Often emaciated,
stent placement (+/ ++) may be anaemic.
insertion of tubular Preoperative IV fluids
stent through to correct dehydration.
oesophageal RSI, SLT and awake
stricture extubation in lateral
position. Small risk of
oesophageal rupture
(Contd.)


| Table 20.1 Miscellaneous thoracic procedures |
| --- |
| Operation Description Time Position/ Notes
(pain) approach |
| Fibreoptic Visual 5– 10min Supine Ga rarely used.
broncho- inspection (+) Single- lumen tube
scopy of tracheo- (SLT) (8– 9mm)
bronchial with bronchoscopy
tree ± biopsy diaphragm on angle
and bronchial piece. IPPV with
brushings/ relaxant appropriate to
lavage duration. Expect high
airway pressures while
scope in ETT. Suction
can empty breathing
system. Surgeon may
perform via DLT at start
of a major case
Lung biopsy Diagnostic 30– 60min VaTS (open DLT and one- lung
sampling of (+++/ procedure ventilation (OLV)
lung tissue ++++) becoming facilitate VaTS
for localised rare) procedures. Patients
or diffuse with diffuse disease can
abnormality have very poor lung
function. Minor blood
loss, G&S: X-m atch if
anaemic
Oesopha- Visual 5– 20min Supine Regurgitation risk, so
goscopy inspection of (– / +) RSI advised. SLT on
and dilation oesophagus left side of mouth—
(O&D) via rigid or watch for airway
fibreoptic obstruction and ETT
scope ± displacement during
dilation of procedure. Flexible
stricture oesophagoscopy often
done under IV sedation
Oesophageal Endoscopic 10– 30min Supine Often emaciated,
stent placement (+/ ++) may be anaemic.
insertion of tubular Preoperative IV fluids
stent through to correct dehydration.
oesophageal RSI, SLT and awake
stricture extubation in lateral
position. Small risk of
oesophageal rupture |


---

## 頁面 555

534
534 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Table 20.1 (Contd.)
Operation Description Time Position/ Notes
(pain) approach
Fundo- ‘antireflux’ 2– 3h Supine/ Fundoplication patients
plication/ procedure: (+++/ laparotomy. often obese— check
hiatus hernia fundus of +++++) Lateral/ respiratory function.
repair stomach left thora- RSI or aFOI mandatory.
wrapped cotomy. DLT helpful for thoracic
around lower Majority approach. Multimodal
oesophagus, done and regional analgesia
may need laparo- advised. Moderate
gastroplasty scopically blood loss, G&S: if hb
to lengthen <120, X- match 2 units
oesophagus
Pectus Correction of 3– 5h Supine, Primarily cosmetic
excavatum/ ‘funnel chest’/ (+++/ arms to unless deformity severe.
carinatum ‘pigeon chest’ ++++) sides, Usually young, fit adults.
repair deformity of midline Ga, IPPV via SLT. Risk
sternum sternal of pneumothoraces.
incision Minimally invasive
technique for pectus
excavatum repair is
becoming increasingly
popular. Moderate to
severe blood loss, X-
match 2 units
Thymectomy Excision of 2– 3h VaTS, Usually for myasthenia
residual thymic (++/ semi- lateral gravis. Check for
tissue and/ +++) position airway compression,
or thymoma other autoimmune
from superior diseases, thyroid
and anterior function and steroid,
mediastinum immunosuppressive
and anticholinesterase
therapy (see % p. 316).
DLT if VaTS, IV
anaesthesia, small doses
of muscle relaxant
or use rocuronium/
sugammadex. Likely to
need hDU bed postop.
Moderate blood loss,
X- match 2 units


---

## 頁面 556

ISOLaTIOn OF ThE LUnGS 535
Isolation of the lungs
achieving independent ventilation of the lungs is not always straightfor-
ward. OLV is associated with complications and should be used only when
the benefits outweigh the risks.
Indications for OLV
Absolute indications
avoid contamination of a lung in cases of infection, massive pulmonary
haemorrhage or bronchopulmonary lavage; control the distribution of ven-
tilation in massive air leaks or severe unilateral lung disease (e.g. giant bullae
and lung cysts) and for VaTS procedures.
Relative indications
Improving access for surgery. If isolation proves difficult, communicate with
the surgeon as lung retraction may be an alternative.
Techniques
Double- lumen endobronchial tubes (DLTs)
• DLTs are the most common and most versatile approach.
• DLTs are described as ‘right’ or ‘left’, according to the main bronchus
they are designed to intubate.
• Right- sided tubes have a hole in the wall of the endobronchial section
(Murphy’s eye) to facilitate ventilation of the right upper lobe.
• Sizes of plastic DLTs are given in Charrière (Ch) gauge (equivalent to
French gauge), which is the external circumference of the tube in mm.
Thus, a 39Ch tube has an external diameter of about 13mm. note that
the diameter of the bronchial segment of the tubes varies between
manufacturers (for the same tube gauge).
• The lumens of DLTs are small, compared with standard SLTs. The IDs
of the lumens of the 39 and 35Ch Broncho- Cath® DLTs are only 6.0
and 4.5mm, respectively.
• Bronchoscopic placement and checking require a narrow scope (<4mm
in diameter).
Types of double- lumen endobronchial tube
• Carlens’ (left- sided): has a carinal ‘hook’ to aid correct placement.
• White’s (right- sided): has a carinal hook and slit in the tube wall.
• Robertshaw (right- and left- sided): D- shaped lumens; traditionally a red
rubber, now available as single- use in small, medium and large.
• Single- use PVC (right- and left- sided): high- volume, low- pressure cuffs;
bronchial cuff and blue-c oloured pilot tube; radio- opaque marker stripe
running to the tip of the bronchial lumen; available in sizes 28–4 1Ch,
e.g. Mallinckrodt®, Broncho- Cath® and Sheridan®.
Right or left?
• Right- sided DLTs are harder to place due to the fact that the Murphy’s
eye needs to be placed over the right upper lobe bronchus. This means
there is less margin for error. The right- sided DLTs absolutely need a
fibreoptic bronchoscope check for positioning. Right- sided tubes are
required for surgery on the left main bronchus, obstruction of the left
main bronchus or a short left main bronchus.


---

## 頁面 557

536
536 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
• Left- sided DLTs are easier to place and more commonly used. They
can be used for most cases, although for VaTS major lung resections,
the opposite side tube to the side of surgery is preferred. This avoids
trauma from the end of the bronchial portion of the tube.
Placement of double- lumen endobronchial tube
• assess the risks/b enefits of using a DLT.6
• Check the DLT prior to use, including checking both cuffs and that all
connections fit together appropriately, including the Y-c onnector.7
• Most plastic DLTs are supplied with a malleable stylet which can be used
to adjust the curve of the tube to facilitate intubation.
• Commence intubation with the concavity of the endobronchial section
of the DLT facing anteriorly. Once the tip is past the glottis, withdraw
the stylet and rotate the tube 90– 180° to bring the oropharyngeal curve
into the sagittal plane. Gently advance while bringing the DLT back into
a neutral position.
• advance the tube to around 29cm, which is the average depth for
patients who are 170–1 80cm tall. There is a 1cm change in depth for
every 10cm variation in the patient’s height from this position.8
• Do not simply advance until resistance as this could result in trauma.
• at this stage, treat the DLT as an ordinary ETT. Inflate the tracheal cuff,
check for ETCO and confirm placement in both lungs.
2
• The diameter of a DLT makes intubation more difficult than with a
standard tube, even with a good view of the larynx. Despite a grade 1
view of the larynx, the DLT can end up in the oesophagus, so vigilance
should be maintained throughout.
• Bougies can be used, but check that they are compatible with a DLT.
Other useful equipment for a difficult DLT are a VL and an airway
exchange catheter (aEC).
Confirmation of double- lumen endobronchial tube position (left)
• Clamp the tracheal lumen on the Y- connector and open the port to
feel for a leak. Look at the movement of the chest and check if there is
appropriate unilateral expansion.
• Inflate the bronchial cuff until the leak disappears. Check with the DLT
manufacturer the maximum amount of air that can be placed into the
cuff. Continue to observe movement of the chest and that it is unilateral
and appropriate for the side that has been clamped.
• another method to check that the DLT is in the correct position is to
auscultate over the side you wish to isolate. Listen while placing the
clamp on and inflating the bronchial cuff; if correct, the chest sounds
should disappear.
• next, confirm it is possible to isolate and achieve OLV of the opposite
(operative) lung via the tracheal lumen by clamping the opposite side on
the Y- connector.
• ETTs often move when the patient is placed in the lateral position.
Recheck isolation and OLV once in position and before surgery.


---

## 頁面 558

ISOLaTIOn OF ThE LUnGS 537
Fibreoptic bronchoscope
• Ideally, the position of every DLT should be checked bronchoscopically.
at the very least, a suitable bronchoscope must be immediately
available to assess DLT placement if there are clinical problems with the
tube or with OLV.
• The position of a right- sided tube should always be checked with a
bronchoscope to ensure correct position of the Murphy’s eye.
• It may be necessary to use the bronchoscope to help intubate the
correct bronchus and then railroad the tube over the bronchoscope.
Several bronchoscopic studies have shown that up to 80% of DLTs are
malpositioned to some extent, even when clinical signs are satisfactory.
The upper surface of the bronchial cuff (blue) should lie just below the
carina when visualised via the tracheal lumen.
Bronchial blocker technique
• Bronchial blockers (Univent™ tube or arndt endobronchial blocker)
are useful in patients who are difficult to intubate, have distorted
tracheobronchial anatomy/ tracheostomy and occasions when
isolation of a lobar bronchus is required (localised bronchiectasis
or haemorrhage, lung abscess, bronchopleural fistula, previous lung
resection and poor tolerance of OLV).9
• a balloon-t ipped catheter (‘blocker’) is manipulated through an SLT
into the appropriate main (or lobar) bronchus with the aid of a narrow
fibreoptic bronchoscope.
• Good lubrication of both the bronchoscope and blocker is essential.
• The position of the blocker should be rechecked after the patient has
been positioned for surgery. They move out of position easily.
• Placement is usually straightforward in the supine position but can be
awkward in the lateral position.
• The lung or lobe is isolated from ventilation by inflating the balloon
within the bronchus. The lung slowly collapses, as the trapped gas is
absorbed or escapes via the blocker’s narrow central lumen.
• Collapse can be accelerated by ventilating with 100% O for a few
2
minutes and then inflating the blocker at end-e xpiration when lung
volume is at its minimum.
• Reinflation of the collapsed lung requires deflation of the blocker and
consequent loss of isolation of the lungs. a DLT will maintain separation
of the airways to each lung until extubation.
• During pneumonectomy or sleeve resection (bronchial reanastomosis),
the blocker has to be withdrawn to allow surgical access to the
bronchus.
• There are two modern forms of bronchial blocker: Univent™ tube
(SLT with an internal channel containing an adjustable blocker bearing a
high- volume, low- pressure cuff) and arndt wire- guided endobronchial
blocker (Cook™). This is a stiff catheter with a cylindrical cuff and
an adjustable ‘wire’ loop at its tip to guide the blocker along the
fibreoptic bronchoscope into the required bronchus (special adapter
allowing deployment through a conventional single-l umen or cuffed
tracheostomy tube).


---

## 頁面 559

538
538 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Management of one- lung ventilation
a V/ Q mismatch is created when a patient is put onto OLV leading to a
shunt. Patients tend to be turned lateral, allowing the weight of the medi-
astinum and abdominal contents to reduce the FRC. The Bohr effect (O
2
being released from hb) can occur due to the physiological changes due to
a raised CO and resulting respiratory acidosis.10,11
2
Initiating one-l ung ventilation
• Start with typical ventilator settings you would use during two-l ung
ventilation.
• Increase FiO to 0.5– 1.0 before initiating OLV. note the airway pressure
2
(P ) generated by this V.
aw T
• Clamp the Y- connection to the operative (non- dependent) lung, and
open the sealing cap on that lumen of the DLT to allow the gas to
escape.
• If correctly isolated, the V should drop to around two- thirds of what it
T
was when not isolated.
• If P is excessive (>35cmhO) or rises abruptly with each inspiration,
aw 2
exclude mechanical causes (e.g. kinked connector, clamp incorrectly
placed) and DLT malposition or obstruction (e.g. ventilating the lobe,
rather than the lung, sputum plugs, opening of the tracheal lumen
against the wall of the trachea).
• adjust V and ventilator profile to limit the P to ≤35cmhO, and
T aw 2
ideally to ≤30cmhO. Incidence of aLI is reduced by employing a
2
‘protective ventilation strategy’: lower P , PEEP 5– 10cmhO.
aw 2
• Some monitoring systems allow you to compare the spirometry loop
before and during OLV.
• Observe SpO and ETCO closely. If necessary, increase the ventilatory
2 2
rate to maintain an acceptable minute volume and CO clearance.
2
• Check with the surgeon that the lung is collapsing (may take a few
minutes in patients with obstructive airways disease) and that the
mediastinum has not ‘sunk’ into the dependent hemithorax. It is at these
points where good communication with the surgeon is essential.
• If the lung fails to come down, gentle suction via a DLT suction catheter
may help.
Hypoxia on one- lung ventilation
• hypoxia is a frequent complication of OLV.12
• It usually occurs after a few minutes of OLV (as O in the non- ventilated
2
lung is absorbed).
• SpO dips but then often rises again, due to hypoxic pulmonary
2
vasoconstriction as blood flow through the non- ventilated lung
decreases.
Actions: the ventilated lung
• Increase the FiO and hand-v entilate with 100% O; this is to ensure the
2 2
circuit is intact and delivering O which will exclude circuit disconnection
2
and O failure. It will also help with checking compliance of the
2
ventilated lung and if there are any secretions.
• Increase the minute ventilation.


---

## 頁面 560

ManaGEMEnT OF OnE-LUnG VEnTILa TIOn 539
• Check the tube position with a fibreoptic scope and make sure that the
tube has not moved to obstruct the upper lobe.
• Suction out any secretions.
• Maintain perfusion with fluid and vasopressors.
• apply PEEP to the ventilated lung, but be aware this can worsen the
shunt.
Actions: the non- ventilated lung
• Insufflate O via a suction catheter.
2
• apply CPaP via a separate circuit to the non- ventilated lung.
• Requires discussion with surgeon as will make operative view more
difficult, which is particularly a problem during VaTS.
• Clamp the Pa, but this is only really an option near completion of a
pneumonectomy.
Returning to two- lung ventilation
• Gently suction the non- ventilated lung to clear any blood or pus— use
the long suction catheters supplied with the DLT.
• Close the sealing cap on the lumen to the non-v entilated lung and
remove the clamp on the Y-c onnector.
• Switch to manual ventilation and reinflate the collapsed lung under
direct vision. Long, sustained ventilation breaths are effective, and
inflation pressures of up to 30cmhO are often required to fully re-
2
expand all areas of the lung.
• The surgeon will commonly observe for air leaks at this point and may
ask for a specific P to be generated.
aw
• Return the patient to mechanical ventilation and, unless significant
volumes of the lung have been resected, return to the original two-l ung
ventilator settings and FiO.
2
• adjust the RR to maintain normocapnia.
• always be prepared to return to OLV immediately, should problems
occur, e.g. large air leak from the operated lung. It is prudent to keep
your fibreoptic scope nearby until you are completely satisfied with
the lungs.
• Many anaesthetists advocate deflating the bronchial cuff as soon as
possible to prevent bronchial wall necrosis.


---

## 頁面 561

540
540 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Rigid bronchoscopy and stent insertion
Procedure Endoscopic inspection of tracheobronchial tree ± biopsy,
stents, removal of foreign body
Time 10– 20min
Pain +
Position Supine with head and neck extended
Blood loss Usually minimal
Practical TCI propofol, alfentanil/r emifentanil, rocuronium,
techniques sugammadex for high- risk cases
IPPV through bronchoscope with O via Venturi needle
2
and Sanders injector
apnoeic oxygenation via hFnO
Preoperative
• Check for airway obstruction: stridor, tracheal tumour on CT scan or
history of foreign body inhalation.
• Suitable as a day case procedure in appropriate patients.
• Warn about postoperative coughing, haemoptysis and sore throat.
• Combined with mediastinoscopy to assess suitability for resection.
• The airway will be unprotected, so patients at risk of regurgitation may
need premedication with omeprazole or ranitidine.
Perioperative
• Give full preoxygenation and check the jet ventilator is working before
anaesthetising the patient.
• It is safer to anaesthetise these patients in theatre with the surgical team
ready to go as soon as the patient is anaesthetised.
• Coordinate low-f requency jet ventilation with surgical activity—t he
surgeons will say when not to ventilate.
• Dexamethasone can be given to reduce airway swelling.
Postoperative
• Sit fully upright as soon as awake.
• a blood clot can cause severe lower airway obstruction, requiring
immediate intubation, suction and repeat bronchoscopy.
Special considerations
• a stimulating procedure that can generate a marked hypertensive
response.
• Extreme CVS responses need to be obtunded, and profound relaxation
provided, but with prompt return of laryngeal reflexes and spontaneous
respiration.
• Rarely, a biopsy can precipitate a life- threatening airway bleed.
• Stent insertion can be technically difficult and may involve periodic loss
of airway control.


---

## 頁面 562

MEDIaSTInOSCOPY anD EnDOBROnChIaL ULTRaSOUnD 541
Superior/ cervical mediastinoscopy and
endobronchial ultrasound
Procedure Inspection and biopsy of tumours and lymph nodes in
superior and anterior mediastinum via small suprasternal
or anterior intercostal incision
Time 20– 30min
Pain +
Position Supine or slightly head up, arms by sides, and head ring
with bolster under shoulders
Blood loss Usually minimal, but potential for massive haemorrhage;
G&S
Practical IPPV via SLT
techniques La and/ or propofol TCI for endobronchial ultrasound
Preoperative
• Suitable as day case procedure in appropriate patients.
• Check for SVC obstruction and tracheal deviation or compression due
to large mediastinal masses.
• Sometimes preceded by rigid bronchoscopy (‘Bronch & Med’).
Perioperative
• Ensure the airway is secure as the head will be obscured by drapes.
• Give boluses of IV fentanyl during surgery.
• Insert a 16- gauge (G) cannula in a lower leg vein after induction (see %
Special considerations, p. 541).
• Beware surgical compression of the trachea (monitor V and Paw).
T
Postoperative
• Paracetamol and nSaID. Usual day case precautions.
Special considerations
• There is the potential for massive haemorrhage from the great vessels.
The risk is i in patients with SVC obstruction (hence cannula in the leg).
May require immediate sternotomy.
• Mediastinotomy can cause a pneumothorax, recurrent laryngeal nerve
injury and VaE.
Endobronchial ultrasound
• an alternative method for mediastinal staging of lung cancer. Can be
done with La ± sedation or Ga (TIVa).
• Effectively, this is a flexible bronchoscopy through either a laryngeal
mask or a single- lumen ETT, so be prepared for problems with
ventilation and you may need to hand-v entilate on relatively high flows.


---

## 頁面 563

542
542 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Lung surgery: wedge resection,
lobectomy and pneumonectomy
Procedure Excision of pulmonary tissue either selectively (wedge re-
section or lobectomy) or a whole lung (pneumonectomy)
Time 2– 4h
Pain +++++
Position Lateral decubitus with table ‘broken’, elbows flexed to
bring forearms parallel to face
Blood loss 100– 500mL; occasionally significantly more; G&S
Practical IPPV via DLT using OLV. Paravertebral regional anaes-
techniques thesia with catheter for postoperative analgesia, arterial
line
Preoperative
• Cancer is the commonest indication for lung resection; others include
benign tumours, bronchiectasis and TB.
• Patients require extensive preoperative assessment to assess
cardiovascular and functional fitness.
• Large majority of wedge resections and lobectomies now performed by
VaTS. This can be done with multiple ports or a single port, depending
on the case and surgical preference.
• assess the airway with respect to placement of the DLT.
• Ensure patient education, commence ERaS protocol and plan the
postoperative analgesia regime.
Perioperative
• Select the appropriate DLT and check lung isolation carefully after
intubation.
• The choice of side of tube to use will be dependent on the case and
surgical technique. For VaTS for major lung resections, use opposite
side tube to side of operation to avoid any trauma to bronchus during
surgery.
• Place arterial line for most cases involving OLV.
• OLV facilitates surgery and prevents soiling of the dependent lung.
• Continuous display of the P / volume loop is a valuable adjunct to
aw
monitoring and managing OLV.
• Surgical manipulation often causes cardiac and venous compression,
which reduces the CO/ BP and may cause arrhythmias.
• Suction the airway to the collapsed lung prior to reinflation.
• The bronchial suture line is ‘leak- tested’ under 0.9% sodium chloride by
manual inflation to 20– 30cmhO.
2
• Use multimodal analgesia as described previously.


---

## 頁面 564

WEDGE RESECTIOn, LOBECTOMY anD PnEUMOnECTOMY 543
Postoperative
• aim to extubate the patient awake and sitting at the end of the
procedure.
• Prescribe continuous humidified supplementary O.
2
• Ensure good analgesia is achieved. Many centres are now using
paravertebral analgesia, rather than epidurals, especially for VaTS
cases. Intercostal blocks can also be placed under direct vision by the
surgeons.
• Good regional analgesia may avoid excessive amounts of opioids and
PCa may not be required.
• a CXR is usually required postoperatively.
Special considerations
• Occasionally, patients with bronchial carcinoma may have ‘non-
metastatic’ manifestations (Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome or
ectopic hormone production) (see % p. 316; % p. 232; % pp. 235–7).
• Perioperative mortality from pneumonectomy is 5–1 3%. aLI occurs in
4% of resections and the mortality rate is 30– 50%.13
• additional risk factors include the inflammatory response to surgery,
chronic alcohol abuse, genetic predisposition, intraoperative plateau
pressures >15cmhO and >4000mL of IV fluid in first 24h.
2
• Incidence may be reduced by the intraoperative use of lung-p rotective
strategies (as established in acute respiratory distress syndrome (aRDS)
management) and GDFT.
• heparinisation may be required during sleeve lobectomy if vessel
resection is necessary.


---

## 頁面 565

544
544 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Lung volume reduction surgery,
bullectomy and endobronchial valves
Procedure non-a natomical resection, or occlusion, of regions of
hyperinflated and poorly functioning pulmonary tissue
Time 2– 5h
Pain +++/ +++++
Position Median sternotomy (bilateral surgery): supine with arms
to sides. Thoracotomy or VaTS: lateral decubitus (as for
lung resection)
Blood loss 100– 500mL; G&S
Practical Careful IPPV with OLV
techniques Paravertebral catheter for analgesia
Lung volume reduction surgery is a surgical treatment for selected patients
with severe respiratory failure 2° to emphysema.14 The aim is to reduce
the total lung volume to more physiological levels by resecting the most
diseased areas, thereby improving the respiratory function. Most of these
patients belong to a group in which Ga would normally be avoided at any
cost. The procedure is also considered for those with bullous disease and
recurrent pneumothoraces.
Preoperative
• Patients require intensive assessment, careful selection and optimisation
prior to surgery.
• These are extremely high- risk cases which are being performed less
frequently due to the relatively high mortality risk (around 8%).
• a clear understanding of the pathophysiology and adequate thoracic
experience are essential to safe anaesthetic management.15
Perioperative
• Surgery may be performed via sternotomy or thoracotomy or by VaTS.
• arterial line required for invasive monitoring.
• Thorough preoxygenation is necessary as desaturation can be rapid.
• There is a serious risk of rupturing emphysematous bullae with IPPV,
causing leaks and tension pneumothoraces.
• nO is contraindicated.
2
• Limit the risk of ‘gas trapping’ and dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation
by deliberate hypoventilation and permissive hypercapnia (ph >7.2).
Recommend V 5– 6mL/ kg, RR 10– 12 breaths/ min, I:E ratio 1:4 and P
T aw
<30cmhO.
2
• air trapping can prolong collapse of the operative lung. External
pressure by the surgeon and endobronchial suctioning can help.
• Bronchospasm and sputum retention with mucus plugging can also be a
problem.
• Cautious fluid use is advised unless the patient requires fluid/b lood due
to haemorrhage.


---

## 頁面 566

LUnG VOLUME REDUCTIOn SURGERY 545
Postoperative
• aim to extubate at the end of the procedure. hDU or ICU care will be
required in most cases.
• Watch closely for air leaks and alert surgeons to any concerns.
• Requires excellent pain relief, skilled physiotherapy and a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme.
Special considerations
• Commonest complication is prolonged air leak: >7d in 50% of patients.
• Mortality from recent series is 5– 10%.
• The national Emphysema Treatment Trial demonstrated that lung
volume reduction surgery benefits patients with predominantly upper
lobe disease and a low baseline exercise capacity.
• Patients with an isolated congenital bulla or ‘lung cyst’ require the same
careful intraoperative anaesthetic management but are usually much
fitter and do not normally require invasive cardiological assessment.
Endobronchial valves
• These are one- way valves that are placed into specific lung segment
to prevent air moving in during inspiration but allow air and mucus to
leave during expiration. The idea is that this will lead to atelectasis of
emphysematous areas of the lung.16
• This procedure is done bronchoscopically with either sedation or Ga.
• There is much less morbidity associated with this technique, compared
to complete lung reduction surgery.
• Interlobar collateral ventilation which occurs in up to two-t hirds of
patients with severe emphysema will prevent the use of endobronchial
valves. In this scenario, endobronchial coils may be considered.17


---

## 頁面 567

546
546 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Drainage of empyema and decortication
Procedure Surgical removal of pus (empyema) and organised thick,
fibrinous pleural membrane (decortication)
Time Drainage 20– 40min; decortication 2– 3h
Pain +++/ +++++
Position Lateral decubitus for VaTS
Blood loss Simple drainage: minimal
Decortication: 500– 2000mL; X-m atch 2 units
Practical Ga, ETT and IPPV with DLT advised for decortication
techniques (risk of air leaks); arterial line, CVP if septic and will re-
quire vasopressors
Thoracic empyema describes pus-fi lled pockets in the pleural space. Often
2° to pneumonia, but also caused by penetrating chest trauma, broncho-
genic carcinoma or post- surgery.19
Preoperative
• Patients may be overtly septic and respiratory function often already
compromised by pneumonia or prior lung resection.
• Check for bronchopleural fistula created by erosion into the lung.
Perioperative
• Usually drained by rib resection and large- bore intercostal drain.
• VaTS approach if patient can tolerate OLV.
• If a thoracotomy is required, an epidural should be considered.
• Decortication frequently causes significant haemorrhage.
• arterial line ± CVP, depending on how septic the patient is.
• Be prepared for conversion to thoracotomy.
Postoperative
• Multimodal analgesia with serratus anterior or erector spinae block (for
VaTS procedures), with intercostal blocks at the start. Paravertebral
catheters are not possible due to loss of the pleura.
• hDU is recommended for decortication in debilitated patients.
Special considerations
• Surgical goal is to remove infected tissue, including pleural ‘peel’, fully
re- expand the lung, and obliterate the infected pleural space.
• air leaks are common following decortication of the visceral pleura, and
lobectomy is occasionally required for a massive air leak.
• Decortication is a major procedure which requires careful evaluation of
risks and benefits in elderly, frail and sick patients.


---

## 頁面 568

REPaIR OF BROnChOPLEURaL FISTULa 547
Repair of bronchopleural fistula
Procedure Closure of communication between pleural cavity and
trachea or bronchi
Time 2– 3h (for thoracotomy approach)
Pain ++++/ +++++
Position Keep sitting upright, with affected side tilted down until
good lung isolated, then lateral decubitus for thoracotomy
Blood loss 300– 800mL; G&S. X- match if anaemic
Practical RSI induction and fibreoptic- guided endobronchial intub-
techniques ation with DLT
The severity of symptoms is proportional to the size of the fistula— big
fistulae with large air leaks cause severe dyspnoea and may necessitate ur-
gent respiratory support; critical care input is imperative. Features are pro-
ductive cough, haemoptysis, fever, dyspnoea, SC emphysema, persistent air
leak and falling fluid level in the post- pneumonectomy space on the CXR.
Preoperative
• Patients are often debilitated, with the respiratory function
compromised by infection and prior lung resection.
• Check previous anaesthetic charts for ease of intubation and the type
of DLT used.
• Check the anatomy of the lower airway carefully on CXR—i t is often
distorted by previous surgery.
• Patients require resuscitation and a functioning chest drain prior to
induction.
Perioperative
• Key principles are to protect the ‘good’ lung from contamination and to
control the distribution of ventilation. Failure to adequately isolate the
lungs after induction will put the patient at grave risk.
• Commence invasive arterial pressure monitoring before induction.
• Lung isolation must be confirmed prior to positive pressure ventilation
or repositioning of the patient.
• Many thoracic anaesthetists use a modified RSI and advance the DLT
under direct vision with a fibreoptic bronchoscope to ensure correct
placement in the bronchus contralateral to the fistula, before ventilation
is commenced.
• Ideally, three anaesthetists are required, one for laryngoscopy and
intubation, one to man the fibreoptic scope and one to watch the
anaesthetic.
• Once the tube has been confirmed in the correct bronchus by fibreoptic
bronchoscopy, inflate the bronchial cuff first and ventilate directly on
the bronchial port of the tube.
• The potential exists to enlarge the fistula by inappropriate placement of
the DLT.
• IPPV increases gas leakage, causing loss of V and the risk of tension
T
pneumothorax. Minimise P .
aw
• Plan hDU/ ICU care for all but the most straightforward cases.
• Extubate as soon as possible.


---

## 頁面 569

548
548 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Special considerations
• Most fistulae are postoperative complications of pneumonectomy
or lobectomy, but some are 2° to pneumonia, lung abscesses and
empyema.
• anaesthesia for repair of a bronchopleural fistula is challenging and not
recommended for an ‘occasional’ thoracic anaesthetist!


---

## 頁面 570

PLEURECTOMY/PLEURODESIS 549
Pleurectomy/ pleurodesis
Procedure Stripping of parietal pleura from inside of chest wall
(pleurectomy). Production of adhesions between parietal
and visceral pleura either chemically (talc, tetracycline) or
by physical abrasion (pleurodesis)
Time Pleurectomy 1– 2h; pleurodesis 20– 40min
Pain +++/ ++++
Position Lateral decubitus for VaTS or open thoracotomy
Blood loss Can bleed from the stripped pleura; G&S
Practical IPPV and OLV advised for open/ VaTS procedures
techniques
Preoperative
• Patients fall into two groups: the relatively young and fit with recurrent
pneumothoraces (check for asthma) and older patients compromised
by COPD or recurrent pleural effusions (check respiratory reserve).
• Check a recent CXR for pneumothorax and/ or effusion.
• Ensure any infection is treated.
• a preoperative intercostal drain is advised if pneumothorax present.
• Check the planned surgical approach.
• Discuss postoperative analgesia and the regional technique.
Perioperative
• Keep P as low as possible in patients with a history of pneumothorax.
aw
• Be alert for pneumothoraces, as they can tension rapidly on IPPV, even
with a drain in situ, and can be on the ‘healthy’ side.
• avoid nO.
2
• aim for full expansion of the lung at the end of the procedure to
oppose the parietal and visceral pleurae.
Postoperative
• Extubate and sit the patient upright before transfer to the recovery
room.
• a CXR is needed to check full lung expansion. Pleural inflammation
usually causes severe pain, particularly when abrasion of the pleura is
performed.
• Multimodal analgesia is again imperative but tend to avoid nSaIDs
which may make pleurodesis less effective due to anti-i nflammatory
effects.
• Paravertebral blocks are usually unsuitable due to damage to the pleura.
Intercostal blocks can be sited at the start of the procedure.


---

## 頁面 571

550
550 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
Special considerations
• Pleurectomy is usually performed for recurrent pneumothorax,
combined with stapling of the lung tissue responsible for recurrent air
leaks (usually apical ‘blebs’ or small bullae).
• Pleurodesis is often used to manage malignant pleural effusions
(mesothelioma, metastatic carcinoma)—t here may be large volumes of
fluid causing significant respiratory compromise.
• Patients with massive pleural effusions (more than two- thirds of
the hemithorax on CXR or >2000mL) should have these ‘tapped’
and partially drained at least 12h before surgery, because rapid
intraoperative reinflation of the collapsed lung can precipitate unilateral
postoperative ‘re- expansion’ pulmonary oedema.
• Patients with extensive effusions are also at risk of circulatory collapse
when turned ‘effusion side up’ for surgery. The mechanism is probably
a combination of mediastinal shift and high intrathoracic pressure from
IPPV reducing the venous return and CO. If this occurs, return the
patient to the supine position and drain the effusion before proceeding.


---

## 頁面 572

OESOPhaGECTOMY 551
Oesophagectomy
Procedure Total or partial excision of oesophagus with mobilisation
of stomach (occasionally colon) into chest
Time 3– 6h
Pain +++++
Position Supine with arms by sides and/ or lateral decubitus for
thoracotomy
Blood loss 500– 1500mL; X-m atch 2 units
Practical IPPV, OLV via DLT or bronchial blocker, arterial/ CVP
techniques lines, urinary catheter, thoracic epidural or paravertebral
catheter for thoracoabdominal incision
Types of procedure
Minimally invasive
Thoracoscopic oesophageal mobilisation, laparoscopic gastric mobilisation
and cervical anastomosis.
Ivor– Lewis
Laparotomy and right thoracotomy, often laparoscopic-a ssisted.
Transhiatal
Laparotomy and cervical anastomosis.
Thoracoabdominal
Left thoracotomy crossing the costal margin and diaphragm.
McKeown 3-s tage
Laparotomy, right thoracotomy and cervical anastomosis.
Preoperative
• Establish the indication for surgery— usually oesophageal cancer, but
occasionally for non- malignant disease (benign stricture, achalasia).
• Preoperative malnutrition or cachexia is common and associated with a
higher risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality.
• Preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy may leave residual
immunosuppression but can dramatically improve dysphagia.
• Some centres utilise enhanced recovery protocols.
• Will need hDU or ICU, depending on local protocols.
Perioperative
• Consider all patients with oesophageal disease to be at risk of
regurgitation; some patients may require a modified RSI.
• If thoracotomy is planned, use a DLT or bronchial blocker.
• Prepare for long surgery, sometimes involving repositioning.
• Multimodal analgesia is necessary, including regional block. nSaIDs
should be avoided, but give intraoperative paracetamol and magnesium.
Consider clonidine, and for shoulder tip pain, tramadol.
• Plan regional anaesthesia according to the surgical approach.
Paravertebral catheter infusion with morphine PCa for the
thoracoabdominal approach. For laparotomy/ thoracotomy, a mid-
thoracic epidural is advised for intra- and postoperative use.


---

## 頁面 573

552
552 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
• an nGT will be required initially. It is removed for resection and
reinserted under surgical guidance following anastomosis.
• Monitor the core temperature, and be obsessional about keeping the
patient warm.
• a fluid-r estrictive regime is advised, typically 2mL/ kg/ h as an infusion,
with additional fluid boluses as guided by haemodynamic parameters for
hypovolaemia. Vasopressors should be used where required.
• Check hb and blood gases regularly.
• arrhythmias and reduced CO causing hypotension may occur during
intrathoracic oesophageal mobilisation.
• Change the DLT to an SLT to improve surgical access prior to cervical
anastomosis (if performed).
Postoperative
• Early extubation is ideal. If cold (<35.5°C) or haemodynamically
unstable, ventilate until the condition improves.
• Patients require intensive and experienced postoperative nursing care in
a specialist ward, hDU or ICU.
• Use a jejunostomy or nasoduodenal tube for early enteral feeding. a
bridle can be useful in these patients who are prone to postoperative
delirium.
Special considerations
• Oesophagectomy has one of the highest perioperative mortality rates
of all elective procedures (up to 5%, even in specialist centres).
• Sixty- six per cent of deaths are from systemic sepsis 2° to respiratory
complications or anastomotic breakdown.
• Over 30% of patients suffer a major complication.
• The majority of centres perform minimally invasive (endoscopic)
oesophagectomy. Beware ‘tension capnothorax’ if the pleura is
breached during laparoscopic hiatal dissection.
• Occasional practice in anaesthesia (or surgery) for oesophagectomy is
not recommended.


---

## 頁面 574

ChEST InjURY 553
Chest injury
The emergency diagnosis and initial treatment of major thoracic trauma are
described on % pp. 995–8. This section deals with the anaesthetic manage-
ment of rib fractures and the definitive repair of ruptures of the diaphragm,
oesophagus and tracheobronchial tree.
Rib fractures
• These are common and associated with a high risk of respiratory
complications. Trauma injuries are increasingly being seen in those
aged >65y who have i comorbid burden and polypharmacy, including
anticoagulation.
• Prompt multimodal analgesia including paracetamol, nSaID where
appropriate, oral or PCa opioids and regional block are essential to
improve respiratory mechanics and reduce complications.
• Regional analgesia can be afforded by paravertebral catheter insertion
or fascial plane catheters. an increasing number of ultrasound-g uided
erector spinae or serratus anterior plane blocks are being performed,
which are both relatively simple to do, reduce the risk of pneumothorax
and can be performed in coagulopathic patients.
• Plane block catheters can be bolused with 30– 40mL of 0.25%
levobupivacaine and then run as 10mL/ h of 0.125% levobupivacaine.
• Paravertebral catheter insertion is an alternative and provides a reliable
unilateral block with reduced hypotension, motor blockade and urinary
retention seen with thoracic epidurals, which are no longer considered
the gold standard in traumatic rib fractures.
• Operative fixation may be indicated, especially in those with flail
segments and uncontrollable pain.
• humidified O, nebulised 0.9% sodium chloride and respiratory
2
physiotherapy also help reduce respiratory complications. non-
invasive ventilation or high- flow O reduce atelectasis and improve the
2
paradoxical movement of a flail segment. IPPV should be avoided, if
possible.
Repair of ruptured diaphragm
• Clinical features and diagnosis are described on % p. 998.
• May present as a chronic condition or as intestinal obstruction of a
herniated bowel, so check preoperative fluid and electrolyte status.
• The defect should be closed promptly, but rarely emergently.
• The surgical approach is via a standard lateral thoracotomy or a
thoracoabdominal incision. DLT facilitates surgical access.
• Management is as for a fundoplication (see % p. 534).
• avoid nO, as it distends the bowel and may make reduction of the
2
hernia more difficult.
• an nGT should be used to decompress the stomach.
Repair of ruptured oesophagus
• Clinical features and diagnosis are described on % p. 997. Surgical
emphysema and empyema are frequently present.
• Other causes of oesophageal rupture include excessive abdominal
straining and uncoordinated vomiting (Boerhaave’s syndrome).


---

## 頁面 575

554
554 ChaPTER 20 Thoracic surgery
• Oesophageal perforation can be caused by foreign bodies but is often
iatrogenic (during endoscopic procedures).
• Mediastinitis is followed rapidly by sepsis and a systemic inflammatory
response syndrome (SIRS), with associated problems of circulatory
shock, renal failure and aRDS.
• The principles of surgical management are initially drainage and
prevention of further contamination.
• Endoscopy will determine the extent of oesophageal disruption.
• Small tears in unfit patients may be managed conservatively with chest
drainage and nG suction, but often urgent surgery is required.
• Patients should be stabilised preoperatively (chest drainage, IV fluid
replacement, analgesia, invasive monitoring and inotropic support).
• Intraoperative management is as for oesophagectomy.
• Upper and lower oesophageal injuries require right and left
thoracotomy, respectively.
• 1° closure may be possible if the oesophagus is healthy; if not,
oesophagectomy will be required.
• arrhythmias are common, particularly aF, due to mediastinitis.
• Change the DLT for an SLT before transfer to ICU.
• all patients are high risk of major complications for several days.
• Early postoperative feeding via feeding jejunostomy or parenterally.
• There is a significant incidence of dehiscence, resulting in an
oesophagopleurocutaneous fistula with high mortality.
Repair of tracheobronchial injury
• Most patients with significant tracheal/ bronchial disruption do not reach
hospital alive.
• Clinical features of laryngeal and tracheobronchial injuries are described
on % p. 998.
• 100% O and relief of tension pneumothorax (see % p. 974).
2
• If ventilation and oxygenation are acceptable, call for thoracic surgical
assistance and try to assess and identify the site of airway injury by
fibreoptic bronchoscopy before intubation.
• airway management and anaesthetic principles apply as for a large
bronchopleural fistula (see % pp. 547–8).
• adequate positive pressure ventilation may be impossible with an SLT.
• a torn bronchus can be isolated by fibreoptic-g uided intubation of the
contralateral intact main bronchus with an appropriate DLT.
• an uncut SLT can be guided past an upper tracheal tear with a
bronchoscope, so its cuff lies distal to the injury.
• Once the airway is secure and ventilation is stabilised, proceed to an
urgent thoracotomy for repair.
• Carinal disruption may require CPB to maintain oxygenation during
repair.
• Inappropriate management can lead to long- term airway problems.


---

## 頁面 576

ChEST InjURY 555
Further reading
El- Boghdadly K, Wiles MD (2019). Regional anaesthesia for rib fractures: too many choices, too little
evidence. Anaesthesia, 74, 564– 8.
Wilson WC, Benumof jL (2005). anesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Miller RD (ed). Miller’s
Anesthesia, 6th edn. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; pp. 1847– 930.
Ghosh S, Latimer RD (1999). Thoracic Anaesthesia Principles and Practice. London:
Butterworth- heinemann.
References
1 Lim E, Baldwin D, Beckles M, et al.; British Thoracic Society, Society for Cardiothoracic Surgery
in Great Britain and Ireland (2010). Guidelines on the radical management of patients with lung
cancer. Thorax, 65 (Suppl 3), iii1– 27.
2 hackett S, jones R, Kapila R (2019). anaesthesia for pneumonectomy. BJA Educ, 19, 297– 300.
3 Short hL, Kamalanathan K (2018). has analgesia changed for lung resection surgery? Anaesthesia,
73, 444– 9.
4 Slinger P, Campos jh (2020). anaesthesia for thoracic surgery. In: Gropper M, Miller R, Cohen n
(eds). Miller’s Anesthesia, 9th edn. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier; pp. 1648– 716.
5 Batchelor TjP, Rasburn nj, abdelnour-B erchtold E, et al. (2019). Guidelines for enhanced re-
covery after lung surgery: recommendations of the Enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERaS)
Society and the European Society of Thoracic Surgeons (ESTS). Depth of placement of left
double- lumen endobronchial tubes. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg, 55, 91– 115.
6 ashok V, Francis j (2018). a practical approach to one lung ventilation. BJA Educ, 18, 69– 74.
7 Dr Gallagher’s neighborhood. Lung isolation. M https:// www.youtube.com/ watch?v=9oV_
0abTW6s
8 Brodsky jB, Benumof jL, Ehrenwerth j, Ozaki GT (1991). Depth of placement of left double-
lumen endobronchial tubes. Anesth Analg, 73, 570– 2.
9 Campos jh (2003). Which device should be considered the best for lung isolation: double- lumen
endotracheal tube versus bronchial blockers. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol, 20, 27– 31.
10 Wilson WC, Benumof jL (2005). Physiology of one lung ventilation. In: Miller RD (ed). Miller’s
Anesthesia, 6th edn. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; pp. 1890– 4.
11 Conacher I (1998). Dynamic hyperinflation—t he anaesthetist applying a tourniquet to the right
heart. Br J Anaesth, 81, 116– 17.
12 Karzai W, Schwarzkopf K (2009). hypoxemia during one lung ventilation: prediction, prevention
and treatment. Anesthesiology, 110, 1402– 11.
13 Slinger PD (2006). Postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema: good news, bad news. Anesthesiology,
105, 2– 5.
14 Elayaperumal aK, jackson RE (2018). anaesthesia for lung volume reduction surgery and
endobronchial valves. BJA Educ, 18, 193– 8.
15 national Institute for health and Care Excellence (2017). Endobronchial valve insertion to reduce
lung volume in emphysema. Interventional procedures guidance [IPG600]. M https:// www.nice.
org.uk/ guidance/ ipg600
16 Zoumot Z, Davey C, jordan S, et al. (2017). Endobronchial valves for patients with heteroge-
neous emphysema and without interlobar collateral ventilation: open label treatment following
the BeLieVeR- hIFi study. Thorax, 72, 272– 9.
17 Shen KR, Bribriesco a, Crabtree T, et al. (2017). The american association for Thoracic Surgery
consensus guidelines for the management of empyema. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg, 153, 129– 46.


---

## 頁面 577

556


---
