# Chapter 22: Vascular Surgery 血管外科麻醉

## 頁面 610

Chapter 22 589
Vascular surgery
Mark Stoneham
General principles 590
Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 592
Emergency open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm 595
Endovascular stenting of elective or emergency abdominal aortic
aneurysm 597
Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair 599
Carotid endarterectomy 601
Peripheral revascularisation 604
Axillobifemoral bypass 605
Amputations 606
Thoracoscopic sympathectomy 607
First rib resection 608
Arteriovenous fistula formation 609
Varicose vein surgery 610
See also
% Ascending aorta and aortic arch surgery pp. 521–2


---

## 頁面 611

590
590 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
General principles
Vascular surgery usually involves operating on arteries diseased by ath-
erosclerosis, causing poor peripheral blood flow (ischaemia) or emboli.
Mortality is high; elective abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) surgery has a
mortality of 2.4%,1 while that of ruptured AAA is 30–4 0%. Operations may
be long and involve blood transfusion, marked fluid shifts and significant im-
pairment of lung function. In the UK, all major vascular operations now take
place in designated ‘vascular centres’.
• Vascular patients are usually elderly arteriopaths with significant
associated disease. hypertension (66%), IhD (angina, MI), heart failure,
DM and COPD (many are current or ex-s mokers) are common.
Many patients are taking aspirin, β- blockers, diuretics, heart failure
medication, insulin and/ or oral hypoglycaemics.
• Some patients are anticoagulated; others will receive anticoagulants
perioperatively— consider the pros and cons of regional techniques
carefully (see % p. 591). however, regional techniques can reduce
morbidity and mortality (see % p. 1109).
• Vascular patients tend to have serial operations, so there may be
several previous anaesthetic records to review. A significant minority
of vascular operations occur out of hours and these are often high-r isk
procedures in high- risk patients.
• Measure NIBP in both arms as these may differ due to arteriopathy (use
the higher BP side clinically; put your arterial line in this side).
• All patients require prophylactic antibiotic cover.
• Develop a working relationship with your vascular surgeon; you will
have a better chance of being warned of untoward events (e.g. aortic
clamping/ unclamping, sudden massive blood loss, etc.). Vascular
surgery is the only anaesthetic subspecialty where the presence of a
specialist consultant vascular anaesthetist has been shown to reduce
long- term mortality of major vascular surgery. The most likely cause for
this is better teamwork.2
Preoperative assessment
• Quantify the extent of any cardiorespiratory disease, both in terms of
the planned surgical procedure and the postoperative period. Carefully
consider (and document) if regional anaesthesia is appropriate.
• Include direct questions about exercise tolerance (walking distance on
the flat, ability to climb stairs) and the ability to lie supine. Look for signs
of cardiac failure.
• Investigations: FBC, U&E, coagulation, LFTs, ECG and CXr.
Premedication
Continue β- blockers and statins perioperatively. Anxiolytic premedication
may be useful for major surgery.


---

## 頁面 612

GENErAL PrINCIPLES 591
Regional anaesthesia and analgesia in vascular surgical
patients
regional anaesthesia may be used alone for distal vascular surgery and is
commonly used for carotid surgery. Epidural analgesia has been recom-
mended by NICE to supplement GA for AAA. The advantages of regional
techniques include:
• Improved patient monitoring (CEA)
• reduced hospital stay and cost (CEA)
• Improved blood flow, reduced DVT, reduced reoperation (peripheral
revascularisation)
• Postoperative pain relief (AAA, distal revascularisation, amputation)
• reduced pulmonary complications (AAA)
• Pre- emptive analgesia for amputations— possible reduction in phantom
limb pain
• Treatment of proximal hypertension during aortic cross-c lamp.
Epidural catheters and anticoagulation
(See % p. 1109.)
References
1 howell SJ (2017). Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in the United Kingdom: an exemplar for the
role of anaesthetists in perioperative medicine. Br J Anaesth, 119 Suppl 1, i15– 22.
2 Walsh Sr, Bhutta h, Tang TY, et al. (2010). Anaesthetic specialisation leads to improved early- and
medium- term survival following major vascular surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg, 39, 719– 25.


---

## 頁面 613

592
592 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
Procedure Excision of aortic aneurysmal sac and replace-
ment with synthetic graft (tube/ trouser graft)
Time 2– 4h
Pain ++++
Position Supine, arms out (crucifix)
Blood loss 500– 2000+ mL, X-m atch 6 units. Suitable for
cell salvage
Practical techniques ETT + IPPV, arterial + CVP lines. CO
monitoring. Epidural/ spinal morphine for
postoperative pain relief
Preoperative
• The elderly often have multiple coexisting diseases.
• The 30d mortality for elective open surgery is 2.4% (predominantly MI
and multiorgan failure).
• A dynamic assessment of the cardiac function is required for all elective
aortic surgery and for any patients with symptomatic/n ew cardiac
disease. CPET is the ‘gold standard’ for all patients undergoing AAA
repair (see % pp. 33–5). refer patients with critical IhD to cardiology
for angiography and possible coronary revascularisation before aortic
surgery. Emergent vascular patients may have to undergo surgery
before such dynamic investigations.
• PFTs (including ABG analysis while breathing air) should be performed
in patients with significant respiratory disease.
• Careful preoperative assessment is essential. Scrutinise the ECG for
signs of ischaemia, and check for any renal impairment. Check access
sites for CVC and arterial line.
• hDU/I CU for postoperative care. Alert the patient to this plan,
especially if a period of postoperative IPPV is planned. Preoptimisation
is performed in a few units but is not widespread— patients are
admitted to the hDU/I CU preoperatively to have lines, etc. inserted
and to have the haemodynamic status ‘optimised’.
• Continue the usual cardiac medications perioperatively.
Perioperative
• have available vasoconstrictors (ephedrine and metaraminol),
vasodilators (GTN) and β- blockers (labetalol).
• Two 14G or greater IV access.
• Monitor intraoperative temperature and be obsessive about
temperature control from the start. Avoid heat loss, as it is easier to
keep a patient’s temperature constant than to try to increase it. Use a
fluid warmer (ideally fast-fl ow) and a forced air warmer (avoiding the
lower limbs while the aortic cross- clamp is in place, as this may worsen
limb ischaemia).
• There is no good evidence supporting the use of isovolaemic
haemodilution. Cell salvage should be mandatory—t here is good
evidence that it reduces usage of allogeneic blood in aortic surgery.


---

## 頁面 614

ABDOMINAL AOrTIC ANEUrYSM rEPAIr 593
• Arterial line and thoracic epidural (T6– T11) preinduction. Take a
baseline blood gas some time before cross- clamping.
• have syringe drivers available for inotropes and vasodilators.
• Use 5- lead ECG (leads II and V) to increase the sensitivity of detection
5
of myocardial ischaemia.
• Multiple- lumen CVC after induction. Consider inserting a PAFC
introducer to the right internal jugular or left subclavian vein in complex
cases, as this will allow rapid fluid administration and facilitate PA
catheter insertion if necessary.
• Continuous CO monitoring is useful during the cross- clamp period for
all patients, particularly those with impaired cardiac function. Possibilities
include: PA catheter, LiDCO™, PiCCO™ and oesophageal Doppler;
however, the latter is not accurate during aortic cross- clamping.
• Careful induction with intra- arterial BP monitoring. Use moderate/ high-
dose opioid, e.g. remifentanil (0.1– 0.2 micrograms/ kg/ min) or high-
dose fentanyl (5– 10 micrograms/ kg). Treat hypotension with fluids at
first and then with cautious vasoconstriction (metaraminol 0.25–0 .5mg).
There is no difference in cardiac outcome between sevoflurane-b ased
anaesthesia and TIVA.3
• Insert a urinary catheter for hourly measurements of urine output.
• heparin 3000–5 000 units is usually given just before cross- clamp. This
may be reversed after unclamping with protamine 0.5– 1mg per 100
units heparin IV slowly— hypotension results if given too quickly.
• Proximal hypertension may follow aortic cross- clamping and is due to
a sudden increase in SVr, i SVC flow and sympatho- adrenal response.
Treat by deepening the anaesthesia and/o r with a bolus of β- blocker
(labetalol 5– 10mg), GTN infusion or epidural LA.
• While the aorta is clamped, metabolic acidosis will develop due to
ischaemic lower limbs. Maintaining the minute ventilation will cause
respiratory alkalosis to develop, which will minimise the effects of this
metabolic acidosis when the aorta is unclamped. Check ABGs to assess
hct, metabolic acidosis, respiratory compensation and ionised Ca2+.
• Cross- clamp time is usually 60+min. During this time, start giving fluid,
aiming for a moderately i CVP (5cmhO greater than the baseline) by
2
the time unclamping occurs. This helps CVS stability, reduces sudden
hypotension and may help preserve the renal function. release of the
cross- clamp one limb at a time also helps haemodynamic stability.
• hypotension following aortic unclamping is caused by d SVr, relative
hypovolaemia and myocardial ‘stunning’ due to the return of cold
metabolic waste products from the legs. Treat with IV fluids and/o r
lighten the anaesthetic depth and/ or with small doses of inotropes, e.g.
adrenaline 10- microgram aliquots (1mL of 1:100 000) and/ or a bolus
of calcium gluconate (up to 10mL of 10%). Inotropes may be needed
postoperatively.
• For fluid replacement, give isotonic crystalloid or colloid to replace
insensible, 3rd space and initial blood loss. Give blood products when
a deficiency is identified, e.g. hct <25%, platelets <100 × 109/ L. Check
the ACT (normal <140s) if you suspect coagulopathy. TEG® will give
you the whole coagulation picture.
• TOE may provide useful data during the cross- clamp period.4


---

## 頁面 615

594
594 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
Postoperative
• ICU/ hDU is essential postoperatively. hDU may be appropriate for
otherwise fit patients who are warm and haemodynamically stable, and
with a working epidural. Otherwise transfer to ICU intubated.
• Opioid infusion and/ or PCA if no epidural. routine observations of
arterial and CVP monitoring, distal pulses and urine output should be
continued postoperatively to assess haemodynamic stability. There is
potential for large fluid shifts which need replacement.
Special considerations
• Management of epidural: a bolus of epidural diamorphine 2–3 mg at
induction will last for 12– 24h. Use epidural LA sparingly until the aorta
is closed. It is easier to treat the hypotension of aortic unclamping with
a functioning sympathetic nervous system.
• renal failure occurs in 1– 2% of cases, is multifactorial in origin and is
associated with a mortality of 50% following AAA repair. It is more
likely if the cross- clamp is suprarenal. There is no evidence that
dopamine prevents renal failure, merely acting as an inotrope. Mannitol
is used routinely by some (0.5g/k g during cross- clamp) as a free radical
scavenger and an osmotic diuretic. Avoid hypovolaemia, and monitor
the urine output hourly.
References
3 Lindholm EE, Aune E, Norén CB, et al. (2013). The anesthesia in abdominal aortic surgery
(ABSENT) study: a prospective, randomized, controlled trial comparing troponin T release
with fentanyl- sevoflurane and propofol- remifentanil anesthesia in major vascular surgery.
Anesthesiology, 119, 802– 12.
4 Matyal r, hess PE, Asopa A, Zhao X, Panzica PJ, Mahmood F (2012). Monitoring the variation in
myocardial function with the Doppler- derived myocardial performance index during aortic cross-
clamping. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth, 26, 204– 8.


---

## 頁面 616

EMErGENCY OPEN rEPAIr OF ABDOMINAL AOr TIC ANEUrYSM 595
Emergency open repair of abdominal
aortic aneurysm
A true anaesthetic and surgical emergency. It may be:
• Acute: presents with CVS collapse. Death is likely, unless the rupture is
contained in the retroperitoneal space
• Dissecting: dissects along the arterial intima, presenting with back/
abdominal pain.
Prehospital mortality for ruptured AAA approaches 50%, and half of those
reaching hospital also do not survive. Overall mortality is 40%.
The IMPrOVE trial compared open and endovascular repair for rup-
tured AAA and found little difference in outcome, so many centres are
now preferring endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAr) for ruptured AAA.5
Management of open ruptured AAA is as for elective AAA, with the fol-
lowing additional considerations:
• Where doubt exists and the patient is haemodynamically stable, the
diagnosis is confirmed by ultrasound or CT scan.
• If hypovolaemic shock is present, resuscitate to a systolic pressure
of 90mmhg. Avoid hypertension, coughing and straining, as this may
precipitate a further bleed. Titrate IV morphine against pain.
• Preinduction, insert two 14G peripheral cannulae and (ideally)
an arterial line. Use of the brachial artery may be necessary, and
sometimes an arterial ‘cut- down’ is indicated. Central venous access
can wait until after the cross- clamp is applied. If peripheral IV access is
difficult, insert a PAFC introducer into the right internal jugular vein.
• Epidural analgesia is usually inappropriate.
• A urinary catheter can be placed before or after induction.
• Induction must be in theatre, with the surgeons scrubbed, surgical
preparation completed, drapes on and blood available in theatre and
checked. rSI is usually required. Suitable induction agents include
midazolam/ remifentanil, etomidate (also give hydrocortisone 50–
100mg) and ketamine. As soon as endotracheal intubation is confirmed,
the surgeons can begin. Treat hypotension with IV fluids and small doses
of vasopressors/ inotropic agents.
• hot air warming and at least one warmed IVI are essential (a fast-fl ow
blood warmer is invaluable).
• Use a colloid or crystalloid, depending on preference. Use a balanced
crystalloid such as hartmann’s solution, rather than 0.9% sodium
chloride (helps prevent metabolic acidosis).
• have both IV lines running maximally at induction. One assistant should
be dedicated to managing IV fluid and ensuring an uninterrupted supply.
Once the cross-c lamp is applied, some haemodynamic stability may be
restored.
• Cell salvage, if available, is mandatory.
• hypothermia, renal impairment, blood loss and coagulopathy are
common perioperative problems. hypothermia is a particular hazard, as
bleeding postoperatively is likely (platelet function is markedly reduced
below 35°C). While there is no place for routine administration of
platelets and FFP, consider early use when needed.


---

## 頁面 617

596
596 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
• Do not attempt to extubate at the conclusion of surgery—a
postoperative period of ventilation on the ICU is essential to allow the
correction of biochemical/ haematological abnormalities.
• Use near- patient testing (hb and TEG®), if available, to guide blood
product administration. If the patient is exsanguinating and X-m atched
blood is not available, use type- specific.
References
5 Improve Trial Investigators (2017). Comparative clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of
endovascular strategy v open repair for ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm: three year results
of the IMPrOVE randomised trial. BMJ, 359, j4859.


---

## 頁面 618

ENDOVASCULAr STENTING OF ABDOMINAL AOrTIC ANEUrYSM 597
Endovascular stenting of elective or
emergency abdominal aortic aneurysm
Procedure Placement and deployment of bifurcated stent by inter-
ventional radiologists into aortic aneurysmal sac via
femoral arteries
Time 1– 4h
Pain +
Position Supine
Blood loss 0– 2000+ mL, X-m atch 6 units
Practical Spinal + sedation, arterial line
techniques
This technique has become widely adopted in the last 15y. It is certainly
associated with lower operative morbidity and mortality than standard
open AAA repair,6 but it is still unproven whether it lowers the risk of an-
eurysm rupture; thus, postoperatively, patients must be kept under CT
surveillance for the rest of their lives. Significant complications, such as mi-
gration of the stent and endoleak, can develop, as well as rupture of the
original aneurysm sac.
• The procedure is performed in the angiography suite with the
interventional radiologists. In many hospitals, vascular surgeons gain
access to the aorta via the femoral arteries, and the stent is inserted by
an interventional radiologist, although all the procedure may be done
by one or the other. Most straightforward EVAr procedures are done
percutaneously; thus, LA may be suitable.
• During elective EVAr, if the aneurysm ruptures (incidence is around
2%), mortality rises to >50%.
• Preassessment, monitoring and X- matching are all exactly as for an
open repair. however, since the patient will not undergo aortic cross-
clamping, patients who have been refused open surgery because of
significant LV impairment may tolerate EVAr. ICU is usually not needed
postoperatively. Guidelines for who should be offered EVAr or open
repair are still under development.
• GA, regional anaesthesia or LA is appropriate, depending on
preference, although regional anaesthesia/ LA may shorten the
procedure and hospital stay.7,8
• Postoperatively, the patient may go to the hDU or the vascular ward
for overnight monitoring. hospital stay is usually only 24–4 8h.
• Complex EVAr procedures in which custom- made, fenestrated grafts
allow reconnection of visceral aortic branches may take longer than
standard EVAr and are usually therefore best performed under GA.
• EVAr is also now an increasingly popular technique for patients
presenting with ruptured AAA. A balloon is inserted into the femoral
artery percutaneously and inflated above the rupture which confers
some haemodynamic stability. The IMPrOVE Trial showed similar 30d
mortality between open (37.4%) and endovascular (35.4%) techniques,
but with women faring better than men with the EVAr technique.
hospital costs were marginally lower for the EVAr group.5


---

## 頁面 619

598
598 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
• EVAr for ruptured AAA may be performed under GA or LA. A
commonly used combination technique involves the inflation balloon
being inserted under LA to prevent haemodynamic collapse, followed
by induction of GA once haemodynamic stability improves.
References
6 Paravastu SC, Jayarajasingam r, Cottam r, et al. (2014). Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic
aneurysm. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 23, CD004178.
7 Asakura Y, Ishibashi h, Ishiguchi T, Kandatsu N, Akashi M, Komatsu T (2009). General versus
locoregional anesthesia for endovascular aortic aneurysm repair: influences of the type of anes-
thesia on its outcome. J Anesth, 23, 158– 61.
8 Armstrong rA, Squire YG, rogers CA, hinchliffe rJ, Mouton r (2019). Type of anesthesia for
endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth, 33, 462– 71.


---

## 頁面 620

ThOrACOABDOMINAL AOrTIC ANEUrYSM rEPAIr 599
Thoracoabdominal aortic
aneurysm repair
Procedure Excision of aortic aneurysmal sac extending above the
origin of the renal arteries and replacement with a syn-
thetic graft. May involve thoracotomy and the need for
OLV
Time 3– 6h
Pain ++++
Position Supine, arms out (crucifix), may be right lateral if
thoracotomy
Blood loss 1000mL – +++, X- match 8 units, plus platelets and FFP
Practical DLT + IPPV, arterial + CVP lines. Thoracic epidural
techniques
Thoracic aneurysms of the ascending aorta require median sternotomy and
CPB. Transverse aortic arch repair often requires hypothermic circulatory
arrest as well.
In many vascular centres, most patients with thoracic AAA undergo
endovascular repair which has many similarities to EVAr.
however, precautions to protect the spinal cord, such as spinal fluid
drainage, are commonly performed for thoracic EVAr.
Thoracic EVAr operations are usually carried out with the patient
under GA.
Special considerations
As for infrarenal aortic aneurysm repair, with the following considerations:
• The aneurysm may compress the trachea and distort the anatomy of
the upper vasculature.
• Intensive care is essential for postoperative ventilation and stabilisation,
until acidosis and hypothermia are corrected and the lungs fully
re- expanded.
• The aortic cross- clamp will be much higher than for a simple AAA. This
means that the kidneys, liver and splanchnic circulation will be ischaemic
for the duration of the cross- clamp.
• Access to the thoracic aorta may require OLV, so a left- sided DLT may
be required (see % pp. 535–7). A Univent® tube is a possible alternative
(see % p. 537).
• Proximal hypertension following aortic cross- clamping is more
pronounced. Use aggressive vasodilation with GTN (infusion of 50mg/
50mL run at 10mL/ h until it starts to work) or esmolol (2.5g/ 50mL at
3– 15mL/ h).
• hypotension following aortic unclamping is often severe, requiring
inotropic support postoperatively— use adrenaline (5mg/ 50mL),
starting at 5mL/ h.
• Acidosis is a particular problem— metabolic acidosis develops during
cross- clamping and is potentially exacerbated by respiratory acidosis
due to prolonged OLV. Use balanced crystalloids; consider using hCO–
3
and ventilate postoperatively until it is resolved.


---

## 頁面 621

600
600 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
• renal failure occurs in up to 25% of cases; principally related to the
duration of cross- clamping. Monitor urine output; give mannitol 25g
before cross-c lamping, and maintain the circulating volume.
• Spinal cord ischaemia, leading to paralysis, may develop. This is related
to the duration of cross- clamping and occurs because a branch of the
thoracic aorta (artery of Adamkiewicz) reinforces the blood supply of
the cord. Techniques used for prevention (none is infallible) include: CSF
pressure measurement and drainage through a spinal drain, spinal cord
cooling through an epidural catheter, intrathecal Mg2+, distal perfusion
techniques, CPB and DhCA. Surgeons performing this surgery have
their own preferred techniques.
• Fluid balance is as for infrarenal AAA, although blood loss will be more
extreme; blood transfusion will almost certainly be required, and
platelets and FFP are more commonly used. Cell salvage is mandatory.


---

## 頁面 622

CArOTID ENDArTErECTOMY 601
Carotid endarterectomy
Procedure removal of atheromatous plaque from the internal ca-
rotid artery. The internal carotid artery is clamped and
opened, the plaque removed and the artery closed dir-
ectly or with a patch
Time 1– 3h
Pain ++
Position Supine, head- up. Contralateral arm board
Blood loss Minimal, G&S
Practical Cervical plexus block + sedation, or
techniques ETT + IPPV, arterial line
An operation to reduce the incidence of CVE in symptomatic (TIA or cere-
brovascular accident) patients with >70% internal carotid artery stenosis.
Combined perioperative mortality and cerebrovascular accident incidence
of 1– 5%. Patients usually elderly arteriopaths, but preoperative dynamic
cardiac assessment is not required.
• Monitoring cerebral perfusion during carotid cross- clamping is
important. Advocates of regional anaesthesia cite the advantages of
having a conscious patient in whom neurological deficits are immediately
detectable.
• Under GA, other techniques are used for monitoring cerebral perfusion
such as EEG processing, somatosensory evoked potential monitoring,
transcranial Doppler of the middle cerebral artery and near-i nfrared
spectroscopy. Each unit will have its own protocols.
• Considerable controversy exists as to whether to use GA or regional
anaesthesia. The largest rCT ever carried out comparing the two
anaesthetic techniques failed to show any difference in outcome.9
Teamwork is probably the most important factor in reducing surgical
risk, rather than any particular technique.
Preoperative
• Elderly patients, often with severe CVS disease. Most are hypertensive.
BP control during CEA can be difficult.10
• Determine the normal range of BP from ward charts. Measure BP in
both arms. Use the highest of the two, and aim for 160/ 90mmhg.
• Document pre- existing neurological deficits, so that new deficits may be
more easily detected.
• have available vasoconstrictors (ephedrine and metaraminol) and
vasodilators (GTN, labetalol).
• Premedicate with a sedative or anxiolytic, particularly if using GA.
Perioperative
• IV access (20G and 14G) plus an arterial line in the contralateral arm
(out on an arm board).
• Monitoring: 5- lead ECG, arterial line, NIBP, SpO, ETCO.
2 2
• Maintain BP within 20% of baseline. During cross- clamping, maintain
BP at or above baseline. If necessary, use vasoconstrictors, e.g.
metaraminol (10mg diluted up to 20mL; give 0.5mL at a time).


---

## 頁面 623

602
602 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
General anaesthesia for carotid endarterectomy
• Careful IV induction. BP may be labile during induction and intubation.
Give generous doses of short- acting opioids, and consider spraying the
cords with lidocaine.
• Most anaesthetists use an ETT; the LMA cuff has been shown to reduce
carotid blood flow, but this is of unknown significance. Secure the tube,
and check connections very carefully (the head will be inaccessible
during surgery).
• remifentanil infusion, combined with superficial cervical plexus block,
gives ideal conditions, with rapid awakening. Otherwise isoflurane/
opioid technique. Maintain normocapnia. Avoid NO.
2
• Extubate before excessive coughing develops. Close neurological
monitoring in recovery until fully awake.
The ‘awake carotid’
• Patient preparation and communication are vital.
• Cervical dermatomes C2– C4 may be blocked by deep, intermediate
or superficial cervical plexus block performed using ultrasound or by
anatomical methods11 (see % p. 1118).
• Avoid deep block in patients with respiratory impairment, as they may
not tolerate unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. The learning curve for
the superficial block is steeper than the deep, but more LA is typically
used and all blocks have complications described. Infiltration along the
jawline helps to reduce pain from the submandibular retractor.
• Ensure the patient’s bladder is emptied preoperatively. Give IV fluids
only to replace blood loss; a full bladder developing, while the carotid is
cross- clamped, can be tricky to manage.
• Sedation (e.g. remifentanil 0.05– 0.1 micrograms/ kg/ min) may be
carefully employed during block placement and dissection. Once
dissection is complete, patient discomfort is reduced, so sedation can
be stopped. Avoidance of sedation during carotid cross-c lamping will
allow better neurological assessment. Give O throughout.
2
• An L- bar angled over the patient’s neck allows good access.
• Despite an apparently perfect regional block, 750% of patients will
require LA supplementation by the surgeon, particularly around the
carotid sheath. This is reduced using remifentanil sedation and can also
be treated by direct lidocaine spray once dissection is complete.
• Monitor the patient’s speech, cerebration and contralateral motor
power while the carotid is cross- clamped. Neurological symptoms and
signs are usually similar to those with which the patient presented.
• Neurological deficit presents in three ways:
• Profound unconsciousness on cross- clamping
• Subtle, but immediate, deficit following cross- clamping, e.g. confusion,
dysphasia, delay in answering questions
• Delayed deficit, usually related to relative hypotension.
• Attentive monitoring of the patient is vital, particularly during cross-
clamping. If a neurological deficit develops, try augmenting the BP which
may improve ipsilateral cerebration by increasing the pressure gradient
across the circle of Willis. Increase the inspired O concentration. Tell
2
the surgeon immediately who will get a carotid shunt ready. recovery
should be rapid, once the shunt is in place. If not, convert to GA (use of
an LMA probably easiest at this stage).


---

## 頁面 624

CArOTID ENDArTErECTOMY 603
• For patients who do not tolerate being awake, GA is the best option,
although techniques have been described in which the patient is ‘woken
up’ intraoperatively to check neurological function.
Postoperative
• Careful observation in a recovery room for 2– 4h is mandatory. hDU is
preferable for patients who develop a neurological deficit.
• Airway oedema is common in both GA and regional cases, due to
dissection around the airway. Cervical haematoma occurs in 5–1 0% of
cases— remove skin sutures in recovery to allow drainage. Immediate
re- exploration is required for developing airway obstruction. Although
the block may still be working, plan for emergent control of the airway.
• haemodynamic instability is common postoperatively. hyperperfusion
syndrome, typically presenting as headaches which may lead ultimately
to haemorrhagic CVE, is caused by areas of the brain previously
‘protected’ by a tight carotid stenosis being suddenly exposed to
hypertensive BP. Thus, BP must be tightly controlled. Careful written
instructions should be given to staff about haemodynamic management.
An example is:
• If systolic BP >160mmhg, give labetalol 5– 10mg boluses IV or a
hydralazine infusion
• If systolic BP <100mmhg, give colloid 250mL stat.
• New neurological symptoms and signs require immediate surgical
consultation and investigation.
• Carotid stenting is a developing procedure for symptomatic carotid
patients performed in the radiology suite, in which a stent is placed
under LA into the stenotic carotid artery. Anaesthetic supervision may
be required because of the complications, which include perioperative
CVE and haemodynamic disturbances. CVE rates of carotid stenting
remain higher than of operative intervention.
References
9 GALA Trial Collaborators Group (2008). General anaesthesia versus local anaesthesia for ca-
rotid surgery: a randomized, controlled trial. Lancet, 372, 2132– 42.
10 Stoneham MD, Thompson JP (2009). Arterial pressure management and carotid endarterec-
tomy. Br J Anaesth, 102, 442– 52.
11 Stoneham MD, Stamou D, Mason J (2015). regional anaesthesia for carotid surgery. Br J Anaesth,
114, 372– 83.


---

## 頁面 625

604
604 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
Peripheral revascularisation
Procedure Bypass operations for occlusive arterial disease. A vein or
a synthetic graft is used to bypass occluded arteries
Time 1– 6h
Pain +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Usually 500– 1000mL, X-m atch 2 units
Practical Combined spinal/ epidural with sedation, arterial line.
techniques ETT/ IPPV, consider LMA
• Femoro-p opliteal bypass = femoral to above- knee popliteal artery.
• Femoro-d istal bypass = femoral to anterior or posterior tibial artery.
• Femoro-f emoral crossover = from one femoral artery to another.
Preoperative
• Constitute a large proportion of elective vascular surgery.
• Duration of surgery is unpredictable and overruns are not uncommon.
• Assess the CVS. Usually better tolerated than aortic surgery. A dynamic
assessment of the cardiac function is not usually necessary, unless there
have been new developments, e.g. unstable angina.
• The choice between GA and regional anaesthesia is up to the individual.
There is a suggestion that regional anaesthesia is associated with lower
reoperation rates. Long operations (>3h) mean regional techniques
need careful thought.
Perioperative
• IV access: ensure at least one large (14 or 16G) IV cannula.
• Use arterial pressure monitoring unless it is a very short procedure.
Otherwise standard monitoring with 5- lead ECG. CVC not required.
• GA techniques include ETT plus IPPV or LMA plus SV. The surgeon
should be able to perform femoral nerve block perioperatively.
• regional anaesthesia offers good operating conditions and
postoperative analgesia. Single- shot spinal anaesthesia with plain
bupivacaine, intrathecal clonidine (15– 30 micrograms) and diamorphine
(250– 500 micrograms) can give good surgical anaesthesia for up to
6h. If using epidural anaesthesia, epidural diamorphine (2–3 mg) and
an infusion of 0.25% bupivacaine at 5– 10mL/h will provide similar.
Put the spinal in, with the patient sitting, so they can hang their leg off
the bed, which will reduce their pain until the block is working. Give
supplemental O. If the patient requests sedation, propofol TCI is ideal.
2
• heparin (3000–5 000 units) should be given before clamping— reverse
with protamine 0.5– 1mg/ 100 units of heparin slowly after unclamping.
Postoperative
• O overnight.
2


---

## 頁面 626

AXILLOBIFEMOrAL BYPASS 605
Axillobifemoral bypass
Procedure Extraperitoneal bypass (trouser graft) from axillary artery
to femoral arteries
Time 2– 4h
Pain ++++
Position Supine
Blood loss <1000mL, X- match 2 units
Practical GA— ETT, IPPV, arterial line, consider CVC
techniques
This operation is performed less commonly due to the rapid advance of
stenting techniques; however, it is still occasionally performed on patients
with completely occluded aortoiliac vessels. It is a last-c hance operation for
patients with completely occluded aortic or iliac arteries. Some will already
have had aortic surgery and have infected grafts. It is an extraperitoneal
operation, so patients with severe cardiorespiratory disease who might be
excluded from aortic surgery may tolerate it better. however, do not be
misled— it is still a long operation which can involve significant blood loss,
morbidity and even mortality.
Preoperative
• Usual preoperative assessment of vascular patients (see % p. 590).
Try to obtain recent information about the cardiac function. An
echocardiograph can easily be done at the bedside.
• Some of these patients will be very sick, either from pre-e xisting
cardiorespiratory disease or from infected aortic grafts. Surgery may be
their only hope of life, although it carries very high risk. Provided the
patient understands this, the operation may be appropriate. These are
not cases for inexperienced trainees to undertake alone.
Perioperative
• GA with ETT and IPPV is appropriate. An arterial line and large-g auge
cannula are mandatory; CVP monitoring is optional.
• heparin/p rotamine will be required at clamping/ unclamping.
Postoperative
• Extubation at the end of surgery is usually possible, but a period of time
on the hDU is recommended, if possible.
• PCA for postoperative analgesia.


---

## 頁面 627

606
606 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
Amputations
(Below/ through/ above knee, Syme’s, digits, etc.)
Procedure removal of necrotic or infected tissue due to vascular
ischaemia
Time 30– 120min
Pain ++++
Position Supine
Blood loss Usually 200– 500mL, G&S
Practical Spinal or epidural with sedation. Sciatic/f emoral blocks
techniques ± GA
Preoperative
• Commonly sick, bed- bound diabetic patients with significant CVS
disease who have had repeated revascularisation attempts previously.
• Many will be in considerable discomfort preoperatively (less so the
diabetics) and may be on large doses of enteral or parenteral opioids.
regional analgesia may give more predictable postoperative relief.
Perioperative
• Spinal anaesthesia ± sedation offers excellent anaesthesia which can
be directed unilaterally. The duration of block (and postoperative
pain relief) can be extended with intrathecal diamorphine (250–5 00
micrograms) or intrathecal clonidine (15– 30 micrograms).12
• Diabetic patients presenting for amputations commonly have peripheral
neuropathy. As a result, ankle blocks are very successful for minor
amputations of the foot.
• Epidural analgesia offers better postoperative analgesia and can be sited
preoperatively, if required (pre- emptive analgesia).
• GA is an option, but additional regional blockade is advisable (combined
sciatic/ femoral blocks will ensure analgesia for up to 24h). A wound
catheter may be placed next to the sciatic nerve by the surgeon for
postoperative infusion of LA (e.g. bupivacaine 0.25% at 10mL/h ).
• Occasionally, these patients are septic due to the necrotic tissue. The
only way they will improve is to have the affected part amputated, so
cancellation may not be an option.
Postoperative
• regional analgesia is the best option; otherwise PCA.
• Phantom limb pain is a problem for 60–7 0% of amputees at some time. It
must be distinguished from surgical pain. If possible, get pain team input.
• Pre- emptive analgesia (preoperative siting of epidural) is believed by
some to reduce the incidence and severity of chronic pain.
• Combined sciatic/ femoral nerve blocks are an alternative to an
epidural, particularly when the patient is receiving anticoagulation.
• Even with perfect regional analgesia, you may need to continue enteral
opioids postoperatively.
References
12 Ypsilantis E, Tang TY (2010). Pre- emptive analgesia for chronic limb pain after amputation for
peripheral vascular disease: a systematic review. Ann Vasc Surg, 24, 1139– 46.


---

## 頁面 628

ThOrACOSCOPIC SYMPAThECTOMY 607
Thoracoscopic sympathectomy
Procedure For patients with sweaty palms/ axillae. The sympathetic
trunk is divided via a thoracoscope inserted through a small
axillary incision
Time 30– 60min
Pain ++
Position Supine, affected arm on arm board
Blood loss Minimal
Practical IPPV via DLT, SV via LMA
techniques
• Patients are usually young and fit with hyperhidrosis (sweaty palms and
axillae).
• Surgical technique involves cutting the thoracic sympathetic trunk at T2
or T3 thoracoscopically.
• Traditionally, this is done using one- lung anaesthesia (DLT), with the
patient in the reverse Trendelenburg position.
• A simpler technique involves the patient breathing spontaneously
through an LMA. When the surgeon insufflates CO into the pleural
2
cavity, the lung is pushed away passively, allowing surgery to take place.
The degree of shunt produced is less dramatic than with OLV. Assisted
ventilation must be avoided, except to reinflate the lung manually at the
end. The CO insufflator machine regulates intrapleural pressures.
2
• With either technique, at the conclusion of the procedure, the lung
must be re-e xpanded (under the surgeon’s direct vision) to prevent a
pneumothorax.
• LA can be deposited by the surgeon directly onto the sympathetic trunk
and into the pleural cavity.
• A postoperative chest radiograph is required to confirm lung reinflation.
• Synchronous bilateral sympathectomy is a much more challenging
operation. This can lead to profound hypoxia when the 2nd lung is
collapsed, due to persistent atelectasis in the 1st lung. It is certainly
inappropriate for all but the very fittest patients.


---

## 頁面 629

608
608 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
First rib resection
Procedure resection of the 1st/ cervical rib in patients with thoracic
outlet syndrome
Time 1– 2h
Pain ++
Position Supine, affected arm on arm board
Blood loss Minimal
Practical IPPV via ETT, avoid muscle relaxants
techniques
• Patients are usually young and fit.
• The position is similar to that for thoracoscopic sympathectomy.
• Muscle relaxants should be avoided, as the surgeon needs to be
able to identify the brachial plexus perioperatively. Intubate under
opioid/ induction agent alone, or use mivacurium/ opioid, and then
hyperventilate with isoflurane/ opioid or similar.
• At the conclusion of surgery, the wound is filled with 0.9% sodium
chloride, and manual ventilation performed with sustained inflation
pressures >40cmhO. This is to check for a lung leak and exclude a
2
pleural injury.
• A superficial cervical plexus block provides good postoperative
analgesia (see % p. 1118; % pp. 602–3).
• A postoperative CXr is required in recovery.


---

## 頁面 630

ArTErIOVENOUS FISTULA FOrMATION 609
Arteriovenous fistula formation
Procedure Creation of an A– V fistula usually in the upper limb to
facilitate haemodialysis
Time 1– 2h
Pain +
Position Supine, operating arm out on side table
Blood loss Minimal
Practical Brachial plexus block, IPPV via ETT
techniques
• These patients, by definition, have renal failure, so they may have
hypertension, DM, fluid imbalance, previous transplants, failed fistulae,
uraemia, coagulopathy, hyper- / hypokalaemia, anaemia or chronic
acidosis.
• The patient may have been, or may still be, receiving a heparin infusion
to try to keep the old fistula patent.
• There may be a venovenous dialysis line in situ. Avoid using this for IV
access unless there are no alternatives.
• Know when the patient was last dialysed. Check K+ and hb. Think
about volume overload or hypovolaemia. Be cautious giving IV fluids,
which should not contain K+.
• Discuss carefully with the surgeon exactly where the fistula will be
formed and avoid cannulae/ arterial line/ BP cuff on this side.
• Avoid cannulating large veins in the forearm or antecubital fossa as
these may be required for A– V fistulae in the future. Use veins on the
dorsum of the hand, if possible. Only site an arterial line if vital.
• Local infiltration is often possible for 1° AV fistula creation.
Otherwise, regional anaesthesia is the best option unless the patient is
anticoagulated.13 Ultrasound-g uided brachial plexus block is appropriate.
For proximal surgery, use the supraclavicular or interscalene approach,
whereas the axillary approach may be better for more distal surgery.
• GA probably requires airway protection due to autonomic neuropathy.
Difficult intubation is possible (prayer sign). Use appropriate muscle
relaxants, e.g. cisatracurium, atracurium.
• Consider the effects of renal impairment on drug metabolism when
prescribing postoperative analgesia.
References
13 Cerneviciute r, Sahebally SM, Ahmed K, Murphy M, Mahmood W, Walsh Sr (2017). regional
versus local anaesthesia for haemodialysis arteriovenous fistula formation: a systematic review
and meta- analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg, 53, 734– 42.


---

## 頁面 631

601
610 ChAPTEr 22 Vascular surgery
Varicose vein surgery
Procedure removal of tortuous veins of the lower extremities:
high tie and strip— long saphenous vein removal
(sometimes bilateral)
Short saphenous vein surgery— tied off in popliteal fossa
Time 30min to 3h
Pain ++
Position Supine or prone for short saphenous surgery
Blood loss Up to 1000mL
Practical LMA/ SV for most; ETT/ IPPV for prone
techniques
• The number of patients undergoing varicose vein surgery has
dramatically fallen due to the introduction and popularity of techniques
such as endovenous laser ablation or sclerotherapy. Despite this, there
is still a core of patients who require surgery.
• Patients are usually young and fit.
• The main operation is usually combined with multiple avulsions to
remove varicosities. These are minute scars, which can, however, bleed
profusely.
• Blood loss can be minimised by elevating the legs intraoperatively.
• Patients may need combined long and short saphenous surgery (i.e. two
operative incisions on the same leg) and may require turning during the
operation. In selected slim patients without aspiration risk, this can be
done with the patient breathing spontaneously through an LMA.
• A combination of NSAIDs and LA into the groin wound gives good
postoperative analgesia. Caudal anaesthesia is possible for prolonged
re- explorations.
• Bilateral surgery is common and takes 30– 60min per incision.
• redo surgery is also common and can be more prolonged.
Further reading
Calero A, Illig KA (2016). Overview of aortic aneurysm management in the endovascular era. Semin
Vasc Surg, 29, 3– 17.
Thompson JP, howell S, Telford rJ, eds. (2014) Vascular Anaesthesia. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Atkinson C, ramaswamy KK, Stoneham MD (2013). regional anesthesia for vascular surgery. Semin
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth, 17, 92– 104.
Moores C, Nimmo A, eds. (2012). Core Topics in Vascular Anaesthesia. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


---
