# Chapter 23: Orthopaedic Surgery 骨科麻醉

## 頁面 632

Chapter 23 661111
Orthopaedic surgery
Richard Griffiths and David Brooks
General principles 612
Fat embolism syndrome 614
Bone cement implantation syndrome 615
Tourniquets 616
Total hip replacement 618
Revision of total hip replacement 620
Total knee replacement 621
Arthroscopic lower limb procedures 623
Cruciate ligament repair 624
Ankle surgery 625
Foot surgery 627
Spinal surgery 629
Shoulder surgery 634
Total shoulder replacement 637
Elbow replacement surgery 638
Anaesthesia for hand surgery 639
Anaesthesia for femoral neck fracture 642
See also
% Regional anaesthesia pp. 1099–1146
% The major trauma patient pp. 967–1032
% Pelvic injuries p. 1001
% Spinal trauma pp. 1002–3
% Anaesthesia in spinal cord lesions pp. 303–8
% Amputations p. 606
% Congenital talipes equinovarus p. 945
% Femoral osteotomy p. 946


---

## 頁面 633

621
612 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
General principles
• About 220 000 major joint replacements are performed annually in
England and Wales.1
• The population is ageing and these patients are now likely to be obese
with multiple comorbidities.
• Many operations are amenable to regional anaesthesia and ultrasound-
guided LA blocks (see % p. 613).
• Patient education before surgery, using joint schools, has promoted
patient choice and highlighted areas, such as the anaesthetic technique,
well before the day of surgery.
Preoperative
• Liaison with the surgeon is essential, particularly if undertaking regional
techniques.
• Arthritis often makes assessment of cardiorespiratory fitness difficult.
• If planning a regional technique (particularly CNB), it is important
to consider factors affecting clotting (timing of the last dose of
anticoagulant) and discuss specific risks and benefits with the patient2,3
(see % pp. 1100–1101).
• A high risk of VTE occurs with certain operations requiring
antithromboembolic measures, e.g. LMWh, stockings, foot pumps (see
% pp. 59–61).
Perioperative
• Give IV antibiotic prophylaxis as per local protocols, but be aware of
the potential for anaphylaxis4 (see % pp. 62–3).
• Utmost care with positioning is essential to avoid soft tissue or nerve
injuries. This is a shared responsibility between the anaesthetist and the
surgeon.
• Maintenance of normothermia with blood warmers and forced air
warming blankets can reduce both morbidity and mortality.
• hypotension should be avoided.5
• Consider invasive monitoring for those patients with CVS disease
and those having revision lower limb surgery, especially if from a
periprosthetic fracture.
• Blood loss may be significant.
• Monitor blood loss accurately. Consider cell salvage, including drain
salvage.
• A urinary catheter should be inserted for long procedures or when
epidurals/ spinal opioids are used.
• Local infiltration analgesia (LIA), using low- dose, high- volume LA,
is an effective technique for pain reduction in elective hip and knee
arthroplasty surgery.6
Postoperative
• Good analgesia will have a positive effect on recovery, mobility and
discharge.
• Liaise with the surgeon if prescribing NSAIDs, but use with care in
those over 75 (see % p. 91; % pp. 1155–6).


---

## 頁面 634

GENERAL PRINCIPLES 613
Regional anaesthesia
• Regional anaesthesia may be used for most joint replacements (alone
or with carefully administered sedation). Benzodiazepines should be
avoided in elderly patients. CNB and major nerve blocks are commonly
performed (see % pp. 1099–146).
• In major orthopaedic surgery, blocks may provide postoperative pain
relief and may reduce PONV.
• There is some evidence that regional anaesthesia, either alone or
in combination with GA, may improve outcome in hip and knee
arthroplasty, although these data are based on large observational
studies.6,7,8
• Good fixation of cement and joint prosthesis requires a dry, bloodless
surgical field. Regional anaesthesia (particularly spinal/e pidural) reduces
bleeding at the surgical site, without the need for other pharmacological
hypotensive anaesthetic techniques.
• Surgeons often prefer the operating conditions produced by regional
techniques.8


---

## 頁面 635

641
614 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Fat embolism syndrome
• Fat embolism syndrome (FES)9 is associated with trauma or surgery
and has an extremely variable presentation; diagnosis is often made by
exclusion.
• Although embolisation of fat occurs frequently, the syndrome is
comparatively rare (1%).
• Early surgery and avoidance of intramedullary fixation have both
reduced the incidence.
• Current treatment is supportive (early mortality 1–2 0%), but serious
long- term complications are uncommon.
• FES is classically seen in patients with long bone fractures who develop
sudden tachypnoea and hypoxia.
• Although sometimes a petechial rash is seen (check conjunctivae), a firm
diagnosis is frequently difficult.9
Features (as defined by Gurd)10
Major
• Respiratory symptoms: tachypnoea, dyspnoea, bilateral crepitations,
haemoptysis, diffuse shadowing on CXR
• Neurological signs: confusion, drowsiness
• Petechial rash.
Minor
• Tachycardia
• Retinal change: fat or petechiae
• Jaundice
• Renal: oliguria or anuria.
Laboratory
• Thrombocytopenia
• Sudden decrease in hb by 20%
• Raised ESR
• Fat macroglobulinaemia.
Treatment
• Early resuscitation and stabilisation are vital.
• Early O therapy may prevent onset of syndrome.
2
• May require mechanical ventilation (10–4 0% of patients).
• Steroid use is controversial.9
• FES usually resolves within 7d.


---

## 頁面 636

BONE CEMENT IMPLANTATION SyNDROME 615
Bone cement implantation syndrome
• Methyl methacrylate bone cement is an acrylic polymer that has been
used extensively in orthopaedic surgery for 40y.
• Its use is associated with the potential for hypoxia, hypotension and
CVS collapse.
• Fatal cardiac arrest is a reported complication.
• There are many suggested aetiologies, of which fat embolisation
appears to be the most likely.
• Air embolisation (Doppler evidence in 30% of patients) and direct
effects of the cement are also possible.
• There is now a proposed classification of bone cement implantation
syndrome (BCIS), ranging from grade 1, with mild hypotension and
hypoxia, to grade 3, with CVS collapse.11
• The incidence of grade 3 BCIS was 0.5% in the Anaesthesia Sprint Audit
of Practice, conducted by the National hip Fracture Database in 2014.12
• Following this report, a patient safety consensus document was
produced which was a collaboration between the AoA, the British
Orthopaedic Association and the British Geriatric Society.13
Prevention and treatment
• Certain patient groups, such as those with significant cardiorespiratory
disease and those on diuretics, are at i risk.13
• A ‘cement curfew’ should be part of the WhO checklist and each
member of the theatre team should have specific roles and should not
leave theatre around the time of prosthesis insertion.
• The conduct of anaesthesia and surgery are summarised in Table 23.1
from the guideline Reducing the risk from cemented hemiarthroplasty for
hip fracture.13
Table 23.1 Summary of recommendations for the conduct of surgery and
anaesthesia during cemented hemiarthroplasty
Conduct of surgery Anaesthetist to confirm communication that preparation
of femoral canal for cement is commencing
Femoral canal prepared
Pressurised lavage system recommended to clean
endosteal bone of fat and marrow
Distal suction catheter on top of intramedullary plug.
Cement inserted in retrograde fashion
No excessive pressurisation in high- risk patients
Conduct of Ensure adequate hydration pre- and intraoperatively
anaesthesia Maintain vigilance after femoral head removed
Closed loop communication when surgeon
communicates preparation of the femoral canal
Maintain the systolic BP within 20% of preinduction
values throughout. Use vasopressors and/ or fluids.
Invasive BP monitoring in high- risk patients
Be ready for CVS collapse (metaraminol/a drenaline)
Source: data from Griffiths R et al. (2015). Safety guideline: Reducing the risk from cemented
hemiarthroplasty for hip fracture 2015. Anaesthesia, 70, 623– 6.


---

## 頁面 637

661
616 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Tourniquets
Tourniquets are commonly used to produce a bloodless field.14
• Only pneumatic tourniquets should be used. Mechanical tourniquets
can cause areas of unpredictably i pressure in underlying tissues.
• Small tourniquets on fingers and toes are dangerous, because they are
easily forgotten. Use a rubber strip with artery forceps.
• Expressive exsanguination using an Esmarch bandage is contraindicated
in cases of tumour or severe infection because of the risks of
dissemination. It is also contraindicated if DVT is suspected; fatal PE has
been reported.15 It also represents a potential risk of LV failure from
fluid overload if compression of both legs is carried out simultaneously
(adds 15% to the circulating volume); therefore, limit to one leg only in
patients at risk. Effective exsanguination can be achieved by arm or leg
elevation for 5min at 90°, without mechanical compression.
• Peripheral arterial disease is a relative contraindication to use.
• Avoid in severe crush injuries.
• Sickle- cell disease: use of tourniquets is controversial. Sickling of RBCs
under anoxic conditions causes thrombosis, but some surgeons use limb
tourniquets after full exsanguination. If employed, use for as short a
time as possible (see also % pp. 257–9).
Site of application
• The upper arm and thigh have sufficient muscle bulk to distribute the
cuff pressure evenly and are the recommended sites.
• For short operations (<1h) in fit patients, a calf tourniquet is preferred
by some surgeons.
Cuff width
• The American heart Association concluded that if a
sphygmomanometer cuff has a width of 20% greater than the diameter
of the upper arm or 40% of the circumference of the thigh (to a
maximum of 20cm), then the pressure in the underlying central artery
will be equal to that in the cuff. This avoids the need for excessively high
cuff pressures.
• Modern silicone cuffs tend to be smaller than this, measuring 90mm in
width (bladder 70mm) for the arm and 105mm (bladder 75mm) for the leg.
• Cuff length should exceed the circumference of the extremity by
7– 15cm. The cuff should be positioned at the point of maximum
circumference of the limb.
• The tissues immediately underlying the cuff should be protected with
cotton wool. This is not necessary with a correctly applied modern
silicone cuff.
Pressure
• Base on patient’s BP measured on the ward preoperatively.
• Upper limb: systolic BP + 50mmhg. Lower limb: twice systolic BP. This
higher pressure is needed because there is often not enough room
above the operating site for a full- sized cuff.
• The use of lower inflation pressures may minimise complications
following the use of tourniquets and speed up postoperative recovery.
In a normotensive patient, a pressure of 200mmhg should be ideal for
the upper limb and 250mmhg for the lower limb.


---

## 頁面 638

TOURNIqUETS 617
Tourniquet time
• The minimum time possible should be the aim.
• Notify the surgeon at 1h, and remove as soon as possible after that.
• If the operation is difficult, the time can be extended to 1.5h. Two
hours should be regarded as a maximum, but this will not be safe for all
patients.
• PEs can occur following tourniquet release. When monitored using
TOE, the rate was higher with i tourniquet time.16
Tourniquet pain
• After 30– 60min of cuff inflation, a patient may develop an increase
in hR and diastolic BP. This response results from ‘tourniquet pain’.
This also occurs under anaesthesia, although the response is usually
abolished by spinal or epidural techniques.
• In volunteers, when a tourniquet is inflated, a dull pain, associated with
an increase in BP, occurs after 30min.
• Often the physiological changes are resistant to analgesic drugs and i
depth of anaesthesia. β- blockers, in particular labetalol, may be useful.
• Small doses of ketamine given IV (0.25mg/ kg) before tourniquet
inflation has been reported to attenuate these BP rises.17,18


---

## 頁面 639

681
618 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Total hip replacement
Procedure Prosthetic replacement of femoral head and acetabulum
Time 60– 90min
Pain +++
Position Lateral or supine
Blood loss 300– 500mL
Practical Spinal with/ without sedation or GA ± LIA or nerve block
techniques
Total hip replacement is one of the most frequently performed orthopaedic
operations. The 17th annual report from the National Joint Registry (NJR)1
shows that there were around 100 000 1° hip operations each year be-
tween 2016 and 2019. The average age of patients for 1° hip arthroplasty
was almost 69y. Cemented arthroplasties account for 26% of all operations,
with uncemented procedures totalling another 35%. Between 2006 and
2019, the number of cemented prostheses has stayed the same, but as a
proportion of the total, it has halved.1 Regional anaesthesia offers several
advantages7 and can be supplemented with sedation or GA. Prevention of
thromboembolic complications is of the utmost importance.
NICE have produced a guideline on the perioperative management of
hip replacements.6
Preoperative
• Careful preoperative evaluation of the patient is essential.
• Patients contemplating hip replacement should receive advice on
preoperative rehabilitation.6
• No patient should be operated on electively who is anaemic (aim for
hb >130g/ L in men and women) and blood transfusion is rare in 1° hip
arthroplasty19 (see % pp. 254–6).
• Antithrombotic measures should commence on admission (see %
pp. 59–61).
Perioperative
• Place an 18G or larger cannula in the upper arm (if a lateral position is
anticipated).
• Ensure adequate hydration prior to performing spinal anaesthesia and
during cement insertion.
• For single- shot spinal anaesthesia: 2– 3mL of hyperbaric bupivacaine
0.5%, depending on patient size. Diamorphine (0.25– 0.5mg) may be
added for more prolonged analgesia but can cause unpleasant PONV.
• When using spinal anaesthesia in the lateral position, TCI propofol is a
useful sedation technique, with face mask supplemental O.
2
• Avoid benzodiazepines in the elderly, as their use may lead to acute
delirium.
• Epidural analgesia is rarely indicated for 1° hip arthroplasty.
• Peripheral nerve blocks offer some advantages over systemic analgesia.20
• Aim to maintain BP at an adequate level, based on preoperative
readings; hypotension is not indicated.5


---

## 頁面 640

TOTAL hIP REPLACEMENT 619
• Intraoperative antibiotic prophylaxis as per local protocol will be
required (see % pp. 62–3).
• Actively warming the patient reduces intraoperative blood loss
significantly and reduces morbidity and mortality.
• Consider IV tranexamic acid.6
Postoperative
• Surgeons usually prefer the patient to be placed on their bed in the
supine position, with the legs abducted using a pillow, to prevent
dislocation of the prosthesis.
• Antithromboembolic prophylaxis is important— at least 1% of patients
develop DVT, even with measures in place (see % pp. 59–61).
• O therapy for up to 24h is advisable in most patients.
2
• hb should be checked 24h postoperatively.
• Patients are mobilised as soon as possible after surgery; ideally,
rehabilitation should be offered on the day of surgery, if possible.6
Simple oral opioids with regular paracetamol or NSAIDs are usually
sufficient for postoperative analgesia. Caution with NSAIDs in the
elderly (see % p. 91; % pp. 1155–6).
Bilateral total hip replacement
This procedure is now rarely performed. Around 5000 have been recorded
by the NJR since 2006. In the latest NJR report,1 there were 386 bilateral
procedures performed out of around 101 000 cases..


---

## 頁面 641

620
620 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Revision of total hip replacement
Procedure Revision of previous total hip replacement
Revision may include one or both components
Time 1– 4h, depending on complexity
Pain ++++
Position Lateral or supine
Blood loss 1L, occasionally considerably more, X- match 2 units
Practical Regional or GA ± nerve block
techniques
Aseptic loosening was the commonest indication in 2019 NJR data, and
over 16% of the procedures were for periprosthetic fractures.1
Preoperative
General principles as for total hip replacement, except:
• The operation may take longer, but timings are variable. Discuss with
your surgeon beforehand.
• Blood loss can be significant, with 1L or more commonly lost
perioperatively.
• Postoperative pain can be a significant problem.
Perioperative
• As for 1° hip replacement, including a urinary catheter.
• If significant blood loss is anticipated or the patient’s CVS status
indicates it, insert an arterial line and make use of near-p atient
monitoring to assess fluid status and hb concentration.
• Technique should be planned, according to the length of surgery, the
operative position and patient factors.
• If CNB is contraindicated, consider supplementing GA with nerve
blocks (femoral, 3- in- 1 or psoas compartment lumbar plexus).
• Use blood recovery and autologous transfusion wherever possible.
• Perioperative blood transfusion is frequently required, and blood loss
may be substantial. Two units of X- matched blood should be available
in theatre, with the ability to obtain more within 30min.
• Consider IV tranexamic acid.6
Postoperative
• Mobilisation varies with the complexity of the revision and the strength
of reconstruction.
• PCA is a suitable alternative.
• Supplemental O is required for 24h or longer, particularly if significant
2
blood loss or an underlying cardiorespiratory disease.
• Remember thromboembolic prophylaxis (see % pp. 59–61).


---

## 頁面 642

TOTAL kNEE REPLACEMENT 621
Total knee replacement
Procedure Prosthetic replacement of the knee joint
Time 45– 90min
Pain ++++/ +++++
Position Supine
Blood loss Minimal with tourniquet; 250– 500mL without. G&S
Practical Spinal analgesia plus LIA
techniques GA plus LIA
Ultrasound-g uided adductor canal block17
Similar patient population to hip surgery. Often a shorter operation with
less blood loss and less chance of cement hypotension. A tourniquet is
commonly used, so be aware of tourniquet pain. Postoperatively, pain can
be extreme and must be anticipated.
There has been a move towards nerve blocks that spare the motor com-
ponent, so that mobilisation is not impaired. An example of this is the ad-
ductor canal block.21
NICE have produced a guideline on the perioperative management of
knee replacements.6
Preoperative
As for hip surgery.
Perioperative
• The patient is always supine, and therefore, airway control under
sedation can be a problem.
• Spinal anaesthesia, with or without intrathecal opioids, is the preferred
technique.22 GA is often used.
• A tourniquet is commonly used; therefore, perioperative blood loss is
not problematic, although expect to lose up to 500mL (and frequently
more) from the drains in the 1st hour postoperatively. There is a trend
to reduce the use of the tourniquet.
• Consider IV tranexamic acid.6
• If a tourniquet is used, one may see ‘breakthrough’ of tourniquet pain
after about 1h, causing CVS stimulation and hypertension. This is more
common with leg blocks and is treated by deepening anaesthesia or
adding IV opioid. ketamine (0.25mg/ kg) is effective at preventing the
associated rise in BP.17 Ensure the patient is well preloaded before the
tourniquet is released. A short- lived reperfusion event is common (fall
in BP and SaO, rise in ETCO) and is usually best prevented by fluid
2 2
loading before and during tourniquet release.


---

## 頁面 643

622
622 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Postoperative
• Postoperative pain is usually the most significant problem, and this is the
main determinant of the anaesthetic technique. Many patients are now
already on opioids, and this makes the management of postoperative
pain more difficult.
• When blood loss into the drains continues to be brisk after the first
500mL, the surgeon will often clamp the drains for a period of time.
• Ideally, rehabilitation should be offered on the day of surgery if
possible.6
Bilateral total knee replacement
• Bilateral knee replacements should only be considered in young, fit,
motivated patients. Elderly patients and those with significant CVS
disease are high risk.
• The advantage is that two admissions/ operations are avoided.
• The disadvantage is that bilateral total knee replacement is a major
CVS stress and is associated with unpredictable blood loss and fluid
requirements.
• This can be achieved under regional anaesthesia and bilateral adductor
canal blocks, but frequently GA may be required for over 2h of surgery.
Revision of total knee replacement
• Same as 1° knee replacement, except it takes longer (≥2h).
• The technique is as for 1° knee replacement.
• If done without a tourniquet, then 2 units of blood should be
X- matched.


---

## 頁面 644

ARThROSCOPIC LOWER LIMB PROCEDURES 623
Arthroscopic lower limb procedures
Procedure Arthroscopy, examination under anaesthesia
(EUA) and washout ± excision of torn car-
tilage, meniscal surgery/ loose body removal,
synovectomy, ligament reconstruction
Time 20– 60min
Pain ++
Position Supine, with leg over side of table
Blood loss Nil
Practical techniques GA/L MA or ambulatory spinal anaesthesia
General principles
• The patient population is generally younger than those having joint
replacements.
• Smaller procedures are done as day cases and therefore require a
technique that allows early ambulation and discharge home.
• Virtually all are done on the knee, though arthroscopy is also performed
on the ankle.
• Arthroscopy for knees with osteoarthritis is not supported by evidence
of effectiveness.23
Technique
• Premedication with paracetamol and NSAID.
• GA/ LMA is a ‘standard’ day case anaesthetic with IV opioids such as
fentanyl 1 microgram/ kg.
• Ambulatory spinal anaesthesia can be achieved with prilocaine due to its
rapid onset, predictable regression and low incidence of adverse effects
(see % p. 490).24
• A tourniquet is often used.
• Prescribe NSAIDs and strong oral analgesics to take home.
• Many surgeons instil 10– 20mL of 0.5% bupivacaine ± morphine (10mg)
into the joint cavity for postoperative pain relief.
• ketamine in low dosage (IV) has been suggested to enhance analgesia
(0.15mg/ kg).25
• Ideally, IV morphine should be avoided in day case arthroscopic
procedures due to the high incidence of PONV.
• EUA ± washout can be performed under intra- articular and infiltration
LA alone. Nerve blocks have been used but are limited by the long
duration of action of anaesthesia and the failure to block the site of the
arterial tourniquet.


---

## 頁面 645

624
624 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Cruciate ligament repair
Procedure Arthroscopic reconstruction of anterior cruciate
ligament using patellar tendon ± hamstrings
Time 1.5– 2h
Pain +++/ ++++
Position Supine
Blood loss Nil
Practical techniques LMA + GA ± adductor canal block
Spinal is an alternative
Technique
• These operations are of two main types: using the patellar tendon
only for the repair, and using both the patellar tendon and hamstring
ligaments.
• Usually 12h of analgesia are required prior to mobilisation.
• Nerve blocks have been used but hinder postoperative mobilisation.
• Oral opioids, combined with paracetamol and NSAIDs, are the
mainstay of analgesia.
• If the hamstrings are used, the operation takes longer and there is more
postoperative pain.


---

## 頁面 646

ANkLE SURGERy 625
Ankle surgery
General principles
• Four main types of procedure: tendon transfers, open reduction and
internal fixation (ORIF) of fractures, joint arthrodesis and prosthetic
joint replacement (Table 23.2).
• Ankle arthrodesis takes 1– 2h. Tendon transfer is generally quicker than
this, and joint replacement may take longer.
• These operations are amenable to regional anaesthetic techniques,
either alone or combined with GA.
• Tourniquets are often used, and tourniquet pain has to be considered
(see % pp. 616–17).
• Patients may be supine, prone or occasionally on their side.
• In the case of ORIF following trauma, surgery may need to be
undertaken urgently if distal circulation is compromised. Beware of the
risk of aspiration from a full stomach, and also take time to ensure that
any other significant injury has been properly managed.
• If regional block is considered for ORIF, check that there is no concern
about the development of compartment syndrome postoperatively, as
the symptoms may be masked by the block (see % p. 1005).
Technique
• Local, regional, general or a combination of techniques can be used for
all procedures on the ankle.
• Nerve blocks under ultrasound guidance are popular and, for ankle
surgery, require sciatic (or popliteal) and femoral (or saphenous) nerve
blockade. The saphenous nerve (terminal branch of the femoral nerve)
supplies the skin down to the medial malleolus of the ankle (see %
p. 1140).
• Nerve blocks following a spinal anaesthetic improve analgesia well into
the 1st postoperative day. GA can also be combined with nerve blocks.
• Care must be taken in trauma cases with fractured ankles, as nerve
blocks may mask compartment syndrome. Always discuss your
proposed technique with the surgeon. The general rule is that nerve
blocks are best avoided in ankle trauma cases. Local infiltration is useful.
• Tendon transfer surgery takes up to 1h and is not particularly painful
postoperatively.
• ORIF may be an emergency if the vascular supply is compromised, and
an RSI is the best anaesthetic option in this situation. A good alternative
for ORIF is spinal anaesthesia. The addition of intrathecal opioid (e.g.
diamorphine 0.25– 0.5mg) prolongs the period of analgesia.
• Ankle joint replacement is a procedure that is increasing in popularity.
Usually the procedure is accomplished within 2h.


---

## 頁面 647

626
626 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
serudecorp
elkna
fo
yrammuS
2.32
elbaT
euqinhcet
lacitcarP
ssol
doolB
noitisoP
ot
+(
niaP
)h(
emiT
erudecorP
)+++++
yb
AL
fo
noitartlfini
htiw
AML
+
AG
teuqinruot
htiw
liN
derutpur(
enipuS
++
17
riaper
/refsnart
nodneT
noegrus
)enorp
—sellihcA
-odnet
enorp
fi VPPI
.enipus
fi lanipS
lanips
ro
)ISR
,tbuod
ni fi(
AG
teuqinruot
htiw
liN
edis
no
yllanoisacco
,enipuS
+++
/++
elbairaV
erutcarf
elkna
fo
FIRO
skcolb
evren
diova
yllareneG
enorp
ro
2 –5.1
skcolb
evren
htiw
lanips
ro
AG
teuqinruot
htiw
liN
enipuS
+++
2 –5.1
tnioj
elkna
fo
sisedorhtrA
ACP
skcolb
evren
+ lanipS
skcolb
evren
+
AG
teuqinruot
htiw
liN
enipuS
+++
/++
+2
tnemecalper
citehtsorP
skcolb
evren
+ lanipS
tnioj
elkna
fo


---

## 頁面 648

FOOT SURGERy 627
Foot surgery
General principles
• Most operations are on the forefoot and toes, e.g. 1st metatarsal
osteotomy, keller’s, excision of ingrowing toenails and terminalisation
of toes. Other operations in the midfoot include tendon transfers and
some osteotomies (Table 23.3).
• The patient population varies, and many are elderly. Those for
terminalisation of toes may well have concomitant problems such as
diabetes and/ or CVS disease.
• Osteotomies tend to be painful postoperatively.
• Surgical time is 30min to 1h.
• Many are done as day cases and require early ambulation and discharge
with adequate pain relief.
• Nerve blocks make a valuable contribution to postoperative analgesia,
particularly in osteotomies and nail bed excision, and promote early
ambulation. however, onset time is relatively long and they need to be
performed a full 40min prior to surgery, if planned without GA. With
experience, this can work well, but for the less experienced, it is best to
undertake them primarily for postoperative pain relief in combination
with LMA and GA.
• Patients may find an ankle block painful, so sedation may be required.
• Adrenaline must not be used for ‘ring’ or ‘web- space’ blocks and is best
avoided in ankle blocks if the peripheral circulation is poor.
• Breakthrough pain from the tourniquet can be a problem, especially if
surgery is longer than 45min. Place the tourniquet as distally as possible
to reduce this effect.
Technique
• Regional blocks useful for foot surgery include ring/w eb- space or ankle
blocks for toe surgery, ankle block for forefoot surgery and sciatic (or
popliteal) nerve block for operations on the midfoot. Most commonly,
these blocks are performed for postoperative pain relief and are
combined with GA (see % pp. 1142–4).
• An alternative in all cases is spinal anaesthesia.


---

## 頁面 649

628
628 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
serudecorp
tooferof
fo
yrammuS
3.32
elbaT
euqinhceT
/ssol
doolB
noitisoP
ot
+(
niaP
)nim(
emiT
erudecorP
etiS
hctam
-X
)+++++
/AG
ro
noitades
htiw
kcolb
bew
eot
ro
gniR
liN
enipuS
+++
03
,deb
lian
fo
noisicxE
seoT
kcolb
elkna
+
AML
noitasilanimret
noitartlfini
lacol
+ AML
/AG
liN
enipuS
++
/+
06
–03
srefsnart
nodneT
tooferoF
AML
/AG
ro noitades
htiw
kcolb
elknA
noitartlfini
ro kcolb
elkna
htiw
AML
/AG
liN
enipuS
+++
06
–03
lasratatem
ts1
tooferoF
s’rellek
,ymotoetso
noitartlfini
lacol
+ AML
/AG
liN
enipuS
++
/+
06
–03
srefsnart
nodneT
toofdiM
eenk
ta
kcolb
evren
citaics
± AML
/AG
liN
enipuS
+++
06
–03
ymotoetsO
toofdiM


---

## 頁面 650

SPINAL SURGERy 629
Spinal surgery
Definition
Surgery on the spinal column between the atlanto-o ccipital junction and
the coccyx.26,27
Can be loosely divided into four categories (Table 23.4):26,27,28
• Decompression of the spinal cord and nerves
• Stabilisation and correction of spinal deformity
• Excision of spinal tumours
• Trauma.
General principles
Children present for scoliosis surgery,28 young and middle- aged adults for
decompressive surgery and older patients for stabilisation.
• Most procedures are in the prone position,29 although anterior and
lateral approaches are used. Some procedures will involve turning the
patient during the operation (see % pp. 435–41).
• Airway access will be limited during surgery and must be secure.
• Prevent excessive abdominal or thoracic pressure due to incorrect
patient positioning, which may compromise ventilation and circulation.
• Surgical blood loss can be considerable. Ensure good vascular access
and accurate measurement of blood loss. Consider tranexamic acid and
cell salvage.
• Long procedures necessitate active prevention of heat loss.
• Assessment of spinal function may be required during the procedure
and monitoring can be affected by the choice of anaesthetic technique.30
• Fastidious attention to detail is necessary to evade the many inherent
complications in spinal surgery.
Anaesthesia
• Thorough preoperative assessment is essential. Any existing
neurological deficit must be documented prior to the induction of
anaesthesia.26,27
• Plans for the recovery period should be made in advance and will be
dictated by local experience. Long cases, those involving excessive
blood loss and major paediatric cases will need postoperative care in
the hDU. Few patients require postoperative ventilatory support.
• Secure venous access is critical. It may be difficult to access the cannula,
so an extension with a three- way tap is recommended. If multiple
infusions are planned, additional cannulae may be prudent.
• Not all cases require invasive arterial pressure monitoring. Indications
include planned postoperative critical care admission, predicted
intraoperative instability, high predicted blood loss and a requirement
for intraoperative blood investigations.
• Central venous access is not required for most cases.
• Choice of anaesthetic will be dictated by personal experience, but
most will choose an IV induction with muscle relaxation and opioid
supplementation. Both volatile anaesthesia and TIVA are frequently
used. Remifentanil is useful perioperatively. The need for intraoperative
neuromonitoring may preclude the use of volatile anaesthetic gases.


---

## 頁面 651

630
630 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
serudecorp
yregrus
lanips
fo
yrammuS
4.32
elbaT
setoN
ot
+(
niaP
/ssol
doolB
noitisoP
)h(
emiT
noitpircseD
noitarepO
)+++++
hctam
-X
esac
yad
sa enod
eb nac
ymotcecsidorciM
++
/+
tnacfiingis
toN
enorP
2 –1
detainreh
fo
noisicxE
ro
ymotcecsiD
csid
larbetrevretni
ymotcecsidorcim
ticfied
lacigoloruen
htiw ycnegreme
na
eb
yaM
/++
tnacfiingis
toN
daeh
/enorP
2
detainreh
fo
noisicxE
ymotcecsid
lacivreC
+++
eohsesroh
no
larbetrevretni
lacivrec
olah
ro
csid
snip
noitcart
sivlep
morf tfarg
enob
ekat
yaM
/+++
,Lm0002
–005
enorP
2 –1
fo noitcerroC
±
noisuf
lanipS
noitatnalpmi
lateM
++++
stinu
4
hctam
-X
rep
1
neht(
ro
sisehtsilolydnops
noisserpmoced
)level
niap
rof
sisonets
lanips
netfo
—ytilibatsni
ro
slevel
lareves
.IOFA
deen
dna
elbatsnu
yrev
eb
nac
kceN
/++
,Lm0001
–003
enipuS
3 –2
kcen
elbatsnu
fo noisuF
±
noisuf
lacivreC
gnitalumits
yrev
snip noitcart
fo
noitacilppA
+++
S&G
.enorp
ro
)amuart
,sitirhtra
.g.e(
noisserpmoced
roiretna
ni
htaehs
ditorac
eht
fo
noitcarteR
lacivreC
esuac
yam
noisuf
dna ymotcecsid
lacivrec
ni
noitcart
ytilibatsni
cimanydomeah
ro ecalp
ytilibissop
a
si
esimorpmoc
yawria
evitarepotsoP
ta
deilppa trats


---

## 頁面 652

SPINAL SURGERy 631
setoN
ot
+(
niaP
/ssol
doolB
noitisoP
)h(
emiT
noitpircseD
noitarepO
)+++++
hctam
-X
rojam
rof
laitnetop
htiw
yregrus
tlucffiid
netfO
/+++
yllaitnetoP
enorp
,enipuS
+6
–2
°1
eb
yam sruomuT
lanips
fo
noisicxE
egamad
lacigoloruen
dna ssol
doolb
++++
-X
,evissam
tlit
laretal
ro
fo
trap
yna morf
°2
ro
.g.e(
ruomut
+ stinu
6
hctam
enips
eht
)ymotcerbetrev
srotcaf
gnittolc elbaliava
evitcirtser
ereves
htiw
nerdlihc
ni
netfO
/+++
yllaitnetoP
ro
/dna
enipuS
+6
–3
rojam
fo noitcerroC
sisoilocsohpyk
.seitilamronba
gnitsixeoc
dna esaesid
yrotaripser
+++++
-X
,evissam
enorp
ni
seitimrofed
lanips
yregrus
cicaroht
dna
lanimodba
ni yregrus
evlovni
yaM
+ stinu
6
hctam
evah
yam
ohw stneitap
emos
ni
desu
gnirotinom
evren
lanipS
.seitivac
srotcaf
gnittolc
ytilibasid
lacisyhp
ereves
VPPI
rof UCI
potsop
deen
yaM
.sertnec
elbaliava
yrujni
rojam
rehto
htiw
detaicossa
netfO
/++
,Lm0002
–005
ro
/dna
enipuS
6
–2
lacigoloruen
rof
riapeR
larbetrev
fo riapeR
.VPP
I/UCI
ni eb
yaM
.)erutcarf
bir yllaicepse(
++++
stinu
4
hctam
-X
enorp
ytilibatsni
ro
ticfied
erutcarf
:etoN
.elbisrever
ton netfo
ticfied
lacigolorueN
detacidniartnoc
eb yam
muinohtemaxus


|  | setoN
ot
+( )+++++
niaP
/ssol
hctam
doolB
-X
noitisoP
)h(
emiT
noitpircseD
noitarepO | .seitilamronba
rojam cicaroht emos .VPP :etoN
rof evitcirtser ni VPPI yrujni I/UCI .elbisrever detacidniartnoc
dna desu
laitnetop egamad
gnitsixeoc lanimodba gnirotinom rof UCI rojam ni eb
htiw lacigoloruen ereves potsop rehto yaM ton netfo
yregrus htiw dna esaesid ni yregrus evren deen htiw .)erutcarf ticfied eb yam
nerdlihc detaicossa muinohtemaxus
tlucffiid dna ssol yrotaripser evlovni lanipS yaM bir yllaicepse( lacigolorueN
ni .seitivac .sertnec
netfO doolb netfO netfO
yaM
+++++
/+++ ++++ /+++ ++++
/++
+ stinu srotcaf + stinu srotcaf ,Lm0002 stinu
yllaitnetoP -X yllaitnetoP -X 4
,evissam 6 gnittolc elbaliava ,evissam 6 gnittolc elbaliava hctam
hctam hctam –005
-X
enorp ro ro
tlit /dna /dna
laretal
,enipuS enipuS enorp enipuS enorp
ro
+6 +6
6
–2 –3 –2
ytilibasid
fo evah lacigoloruen
°1 trap rojam ni ytilibatsni
eb seitimrofed yam
yam yna fo ohw lacisyhp
sruomuT morf enips noitcerroC stneitap rof ro
°2 lanips ereves riapeR ticfied
ro eht
larbetrev
lanips
)ymotcerbetrev
sisoilocsohpyk
.g.e(
fo
noisicxE ruomut yregrus fo riapeR erutcarf |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |


---

## 頁面 653

632
632 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
• If spinal cord integrity is at risk during surgery, it may be necessary to
use spinal cord monitoring.30 This is a specialist service provided by a
neurophysiologist but may require that muscle relaxation is allowed
to wear off. It may be necessary to deepen the anaesthesia during this
phase, but in reality, this is rarely a problem.
• In patients with paraplegia or other large areas of muscle denervation
(2d to 8mo), suxamethonium should be avoided (see % p. 306;
% p. 421).
• Prophylactic antibiotics should be given as per local protocol (see %
pp. 62–3).
• Airway access is likely to be limited once the procedure has started, so
securing oral endotracheal intubation with a non-k inking tube is usual. It is
critical to have a plan for how to manage inadvertent tube displacement.
Patients with unstable necks due to trauma or RA can be intubated using
an awake tracheal intubation technique (see % pp. 246–8; % pp. 393–6).
Some patients will require MILS, depending on the degree of instability
and the anticipated difficulty of intubation (see % p. 973). The tube
should be moulded around the face, with no bulky joints adjacent to
the skin. A throat pack may be used to decrease the flow of secretions
onto the pillow, and the tube then secured with adhesive tape or film. If
a throat pack is used, this must be recorded and part of the pack should
be left outside of the mouth so that it is visible.
• Attention to detail and the use of padding are vital to protect
pressure areas.
• Most patients will be paralysed and ventilated for these procedures,
with positional considerations noted above.
• Check the position of the ETT when the patient has been turned.
Check that ventilation is adequate, without excessive inflation pressures,
before surgery starts, as the only recourse may be to return the patient
to the supine position if problems develop.
• Blood loss may be significant, with venous oozing proving hard to
control. Tranexamic acid is commonly used. The use of cell salvage
techniques (see % pp. 458–9) is advisable for long procedures involving
instrumentation of multiple levels. All patients should have samples
grouped and saved, and more major procedures should have blood X-
matched, even if cell salvage is employed (see below).
• Near- patient testing techniques such as TEG® or ROTEM® can help to
guide transfusion requirements (see % pp. 284–6).
• hypotensive anaesthesia may reduce blood loss during major
spinal surgery. The MAP should be maintained at a safe level—f or
normotensive patients, >60mmhg. Invasive blood pressure monitoring
is mandatory when the BP is being manipulated.
• The type of analgesia required will vary, depending on the magnitude
of surgery. Minor procedures (e.g. microdiscectomy) may manage with
NSAIDs alone, in association with infiltration of the operative site with
LA. Most procedures will necessitate opioids. PCA morphine is effective
after adequate IV loading. The use of regional analgesia is encouraged
where there is no need to assess neurological function, and the use of
epidural and paravertebral analgesia is growing in popularity for major
procedures such as correction of scoliosis. The catheter is usually
placed by the surgeon at the end of the procedure, and infusions of LA
or opioids continued for several days postoperatively.


---

## 頁面 654

SPINAL SURGERy 633
• Effective analgesia is particularly crucial for surgery to the thoracic
spine where postoperative respiratory function will be compromised
if analgesia is inadequate. Consider also using incentive spirometry and
chest physiotherapy.
The prone position
(See % pp. 439–40 for full discussion of prone positioning.)
• Turning the patient from supine to prone requires log rolling by a
trained team, compromising at least six members of staff, to avoid
applying twisting forces in the axial plane.27,29 This is especially important
for the poorly supported cervical spine, which may be unstable due to
fractures or degenerative disease.
• During long cases, it may be necessary to move the patient’s limbs
and head every hour to avoid stagnation of peripheral blood and the
development of pressure necrosis. Pay particular attention to the nose,
eyes, chin, elbows, knees and ankles.
• Ophthalmic complications are well documented and can include corneal
abrasions through to visual loss.
• Pressure on the abdomen can be transmitted to the valveless epidural
veins and result in i bleeding.
Intraoperative neuromonitoring
• Neurological damage can result during operations on the spine. It is
possible to use neuromonitoring techniques to assess neural pathways
during surgery and thus increase safety.27,30
• Intraoperative monitoring has superseded the ‘wake-u p test’ when
patients were woken in the middle of surgery and asked to perform
simple motor functions before being reanaesthetised.
• Modalities include: somatosensory evoked potentials, motor evoked
potentials, EMG and EEG.
• Volatile anaesthetic agents decrease the amplitude of motor evoked
potentials in a dose- related manner.
• NMBAs abolish motor evoked potential signals.
• It is essential for the neurophysiologist to know what drugs have been
given, as this will affect the interpretation of signals.
• TIVA with propofol and opioids is a popular technique.


---

## 頁面 655

634
634 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Shoulder surgery
General considerations
• Shoulder surgery is often excruciatingly painful, more so than many
other day case procedures.31,32
• Pain is not predictable and may last for several days, although it is
undoubtedly worst within the first 48h.
• A multimodal approach to analgesia is crucial.
• heterogeneous patient population: from young athletic patients with
trauma through to elderly patients with numerous comorbidities such as
RA.31,32
• Arthroscopic procedures are generally less painful than open
procedures. Patients get effective postoperative analgesia if the surgeon
injects LA within the joint space at the end of surgery.
• Bankart’s and capsular shift operations for recurrent dislocations are
more painful for larger, muscular patients, but not generally as painful as
cuff repairs and open acromioplasties.
• Massive cuff repairs are often extremely painful, and an interscalene
block is useful. Consider a PCA, and a loading dose of morphine during
surgery. Consider an interscalene catheter with infusion of LA.33
Arthroscopic shoulder procedures
• Used diagnostically and for surgical procedures.
• Examples: acromioplasty, stabilisation, adhesiolysis and rotator cuff
repair.
• Two to three ports (e.g. posterior port for viewing and anterior or
lateral ports for instrumentation).
• Posterior port may require additional LA infiltration if surgery is
performed under interscalene block alone.32
Open shoulder procedures
• Examples: arthroplasty of the glenohumeral joint, open stabilisation,
open rotator cuff repair, subacromial decompression and procedures
for trauma.32
Preoperative considerations
• Discuss the planned anaesthetic technique with the patient, with
particular emphasis on proposed regional anaesthetic techniques and
their complications.
• Choice of anaesthetic technique will depend on both patient and
surgical factors.
• The RCoA produces patient information leaflets such as Nerve blocks
for surgery on the shoulder, arm or hand which may be provided to the
patient prior to surgery.34
• If surgery is to be performed with the patient conscious or sedated
while employing a regional technique, the patient must understand that
they are not receiving a GA.35
• Patients may not tolerate awake surgery, even with a fully working
block, as instruments and drapes may be close to the face.32
• Patients should be aware of the likely postoperative course and the
intended postoperative pain management regime.


---

## 頁面 656

ShOULDER SURGERy 635
• Many patients are elderly; severe rheumatoid disease is common and
patients may have atlantoaxial instability and extra-a rticular involvement
(see % pp. 246–8).
• Ask about respiratory function/ reserve if planning an interscalene block
(some diaphragmatic function will be lost for several hours).
• Check the airway (particularly in RA) and range of neck movement.
Some patients may require awake tracheal intubation.
Ultrasound- guided regional anaesthetic techniques
• Refer to % Chapter 40 for details of how to perform specific blocks
(see % pp. 1119–27).
• Ultrasound- guided regional anaesthesia has numerous advantages
in shoulder surgery: reduced postoperative pain despite reduced
concomitant perioperative opioid usage, reduced PONV and
subsequently improved patient satisfaction.31
• Regional techniques can be used on their own, or in combination with
sedation or in conjunction with a GA.
• IV access should be inserted into the opposite arm or the feet prior to
commencing the block.
• The appropriate block will depend upon the specific operative
requirements, but common examples are interscalene and
supraclavicular blocks.
• Continuous catheter- based interscalene block may provide superior
analgesia, compared with single- injection interscalene block, in major
shoulder surgery without increasing side effects or complications.
• Patients should be made aware of the adverse effects of the intended
nerve block.
Intraoperative considerations
• The efficacy of any regional anaesthetic technique should be confirmed
prior to commencing surgery.
• Use full monitoring, whether or not GA/ sedation is to be used.
• Ensure the patient’s bladder is empty prior to starting surgery, or insert
a urinary catheter for longer procedures.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis should be given as per local protocols (see %
pp. 62–3).
• Avoid intraoperative hypothermia.
• Patients are usually positioned with their head distal to the anaesthetist,
which presents several challenges:31,32
• Pay particular attention to the security of the airway which may be
covered by drapes and be out of sight.
• Airway options include a supraglottic device, a south-f acing RAE tube
or a flexible ETT, depending upon the operation.
• Long ventilator and gas sampling tubing is required.
Long IV lines are required.
• Positioning: supine, head- up tilt, lateral, beach- chair position (see %
pp. 440–1).
• Be aware of complications when the patient is steeply head up in the
beach- chair position:32
• Cardiovascular instability or cerebral ischaemia; may benefit from a
vasopressor infusion or cerebral oximetry monitoring.
• Consider invasive arterial BP monitoring in selected patients.
• Air embolus.


---

## 頁面 657

636
636 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
• Ensure the head and neck are properly secured.
• Ensure eye padding.
• heels and arms at risk of pressure sores, so ensure they are padded
properly.
• Avoid overstretching the brachial plexus.
• The ulnar nerve at the elbow is vulnerable.
• Flex the legs at the knees (e.g. with a pillow) to avoid stretching the
hamstrings.
• If the patient will be conscious during the operation, the surgical drapes
must not cover their face.
• have a strategy for managing intraoperative pain if the patient is awake
(e.g. alfentanil bolus).
• Make use of multimodal analgesic techniques intraoperatively.
• The surgeon can infiltrate LA intraoperatively.
• Consider the use of tranexamic acid if there is significant blood loss.36
Postoperative considerations
• Most procedures can be performed as a day case, so the patient will be
able to go home postoperatively.
• Patients must be given strict guidance to protect the limb while the
nerve block is still working. A suitable sling can help to support the limb.
• The nerve block will eventually wear off (often when the patient is at
home) and the patient can experience extreme discomfort.
• The patient must be prescribed (and encouraged to take) a multimodal
analgesic regime, including paracetamol, NSAIDs and opioids.
• The patient should have appropriate postoperative physiotherapy.6


---

## 頁面 658

TOTAL ShOULDER REPLACEMENT 637
Total shoulder replacement
Procedure Prosthetic shoulder replacement
Time 2– 3h
Pain +++/ ++++
Position Supine, head- up or deck- chair
Blood loss 250– 500mL
Practical techniques GA with ETT (south-f acing RAE) + IPPV,
interscalene block ± interscalene catheter33
NICE has produced a guideline on the perioperative management of
shoulder replacements.6
Indications
• Acute trauma, osteoarthritis, rotator cuff tear, trauma sequelae, other
inflammatory arthropathies and avascular necrosis.1,37
• Osteoarthritis of the shoulder is the commonest indication for elective
shoulder replacement.
• Increasingly common as the population ages. The 2012–2 019 NJR
data showed the median age of patients was 73y.1
• Presentation: pain, d shoulder movement and function.
• Initial treatment is non- operative: activity modification, oral analgesia,
physiotherapy and steroid injections.
• If non- operative strategies fail, the patient may require a shoulder
replacement.
Types of shoulder replacement
• 1° total shoulder replacement: best indicated for patients with intact
and functional rotator cuff muscles.
• Reverse total shoulder replacement: does not rely on an intact rotator
cuff, often used in older patients.
• hemiarthroplasty: younger patients with 1° osteoarthritis and in
proximal humeral fractures.
Procedure-s pecific considerations
(For general principles, see % pp. 634–6.)31,32
• If interscalene block has been performed, anaesthesia is usually
unremarkable. Sometimes breakthrough stimulation occurs during the
glenoid phase (may receive fibres from T2 which are not always covered
by the block). If no interscalene block, load the patient with morphine
and ask the surgeon to infiltrate with LA.
• Pain is worst in the first 24h postoperatively. PCA/ intermittent
morphine is usually satisfactory.
• Consider tranexamic acid if there is significant blood loss.36


---

## 頁面 659

638
638 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Elbow replacement surgery
Procedure Prosthetic elbow replacement
Time Variable
Pain +/ ++
Position Supine, arm out on table
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques GA, LMA/ ETT, ultrasound- guided regional tech-
nique, tourniquet, multimodal analgesia
In 4373 operations between 2012 and 2019, NJR data show the median age
of patients for 1° elbow replacement was 68y.1
Indications for elbow replacement surgery
• Acute trauma
• Osteoarthritis
• Other inflammatory conditions
• Trauma sequelae
• Essex- Lopresti fracture
• Avascular necrosis.
Types of elbow replacement surgery
• Total prosthetic replacement
• Radial head replacement
• Lateral resurfacing
• Distal humeral hemiarthroplasty.
Anaesthetic technique
• Assess the patient for manifestations of rheumatoid disease (see %
pp. 246–8).
• Insert IV access into the side opposite to surgery.
• Ultrasound- guided regional anaesthetic techniques will provide
intraoperative and postoperative analgesia38 (e.g. supraclavicular (see %
pp. 1120–1) or infraclavicular block (see % pp. 1121–2)).
• Prophylactic antibiotics as per local protocol (see % pp. 62–3).
• A tourniquet is often used; ketamine may help with tourniquet pain.
• Ensure careful positioning to prevent tissue injury and to reduce
postoperative pain from other arthritic areas.
• Postoperative ulnar nerve compression is common and may necessitate
further surgery.


---

## 頁面 660

ANAESThESIA FOR hAND SURGER y 639
Anaesthesia for hand surgery
Procedure Various
Time Variable
Pain +/ +++
Position Supine, arm out on table
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques Regional analgesia ± GA, multimodal analgesia,
tourniquet
The majority of hand surgery procedures (Table 23.5) are suitable for LA or
regional anaesthesia as a day case. This can be combined with GA or add-
itional sedation, if required. Some procedures, such as carpal tunnel release
or trigger finger release, can be done under local infiltration alone. IV re-
gional anaesthesia (IVRA), e.g. Bier’s block, is suitable for procedures below
the elbow of 30min or less (see % p. 1127).
An upper arm tourniquet is almost always used for any type of hand
surgery. Positioning and duration of use will be an important determinant
of whether the patient is able to tolerate regional anaesthesia or LA alone.
Patients with a good brachial plexus block will usually tolerate 60–9 0min of
arm ischaemia.38
An axillary brachial plexus block can provide excellent anaesthesia to
the hand, arm and forearm, although tourniquet pain may be a problem.
Other approaches include infra- and supraclavicular approaches (see
% pp. 1120–1; % pp. 1121–2).38
Preoperative
• Full assessment as for GA. The patient may request a GA, and regional
anaesthesia may fail.
• Check that patients can lie flat for the proposed duration of operation if
planned to be awake.
• Assess movement of the operative arm. Can the patient achieve the
necessary position for regional block or the surgery planned?
• Discuss the planned anaesthetic technique with the patient, with
particular emphasis on proposed regional anaesthetic techniques and
their complications.
• The RCoA produces patient information leaflets such as Nerve blocks
for surgery on the shoulder, arm or hand which may be provided to the
patient prior to surgery.34
• If surgery is to be performed with the patient conscious or sedated
while employing a regional technique, the patient must understand that
they are not receiving a GA.35
Perioperative
• Make sure the patient’s bladder is empty.
• Use full monitoring, whether or not GA/ sedation is to be used.
• Prophylactic antibiotics as per local protocol.
• Perform a local block, with the patient awake or lightly sedated.
• Choose an appropriate and familiar block for the planned site of
surgery ± tourniquet.


---

## 頁面 661

640
640 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
dnah
eht
no
serudecorp
lacigruS
5.32
elbaT
setoN
ot
+(
niaP
)nim(
emiT
noitpircseD
noitarepO
)+++++
AIL
rednu
tuo
deirrac
eb
yllausu
nac serudecorp
esehT
+
51
–5
esaeler
evren
ro
nodneT
laprac
dna
esaeler
regnfi
reggirT
esaeler
lennut
kcolb
suxelp
laihcarB
.noitartlfini
ro kcolb
tsirw htiw AG
+
06<
dna
ranlu
ot denfinoc
yllausU
serutcartnoc
s’nertyupuD
:erudecorp
kciuq
.AG
±
teuqinruot
mra
reppu htiw
nim03<
yllausU
.noitubirtsid
naidem
)elpmis(
teuqinruot
tsirw
htiw
kcolb tsirw
emit
teuqinruot
suxelp
laihcarb
a taht
snaem
emit
teuqinruot
degnolorP
+
021 –06
erudecorp
oder
ro esaesid
ereveS
erutcartnoc
s’nertyupuD
deriuqer
netfo
si
kcolb
lacol
htiw
AG a ro kcolb
gnitfarg
niks
deen
yam
)xelpmoc(
esaesid
cimetsys
htiw
stneitap
reliarf
yllareneG
+++
/++
tnioj
rep
03
rof
yllausu
tnemecalper
tnioj
PCM
)PCM(
laegnalahpopracateM
diotamuehr
.g.e(
tnemecalper
tnioj
)nosnawS
eb
tsum
kcolb
yna
neht
,deriuqer
si tnemevom
dnah
fI
++
/+
06 –51
tneitap
deen
yam
serudecorp
esehT
,seimotoluspac
,sisyloneT
etauqeda
yllausu
si noitades
htiw
kcolb
tsirw A .latsid
ycauqeda
eht ssessa
ot
noitapicitrap
stfarg
nodnet
erudecorp
eht
fo
degnolorp
eht
fo
esuaceb
deriuqer
yllausu si AG
++
sruoh
yregrus
ralucsavorciM
noitatnalpmier
tigiD
ymotcehtapmys
eht
rof aisehtseana
lanoigeR
.erudecorp lufpleh
si
retehtac
ro kcolb
laihcarb
tohs
-elgnis
a ,ereves
si niap sA
+++
/++
06 –03
diotamuehr
ni niap
tsirw
rof
yregruS
ro
noisicxe
daeh
ranlU
AG
tuohtiw
ro
htiw ,laedi
si euqinhcet
esaesid
ymotceizepart


---

## 頁面 662

ANAESThESIA FOR hAND SURGER y 641
• Augment plexus anaesthesia with elbow or wrist blocks, as necessary,
to improve success rates (see % pp. 1124–6; % pp. 1126–7).
• Provide sedation or GA, depending on safety and the patient’s wishes.
have equipment and drugs ready to convert to sedation or GA, if
necessary, during the operation.
Postoperative
• Surgery involving soft tissues and the skin is generally less painful than
surgery to the bones and joints.
• Simple analgesic combinations are usually adequate for the less painful
procedures.
• Opioids or regional catheter techniques may be required for the more
painful operations.
• Some patients dislike the postoperative ‘dead arm’ following brachial
plexus block.
Special considerations
• Tourniquet pain can be reduced by blocking the intercostobrachial
nerve SC on the medial aspect of the upper arm above the level of the
tourniquet (see % p. 1124).
• Adrenaline- containing solutions should be avoided near digits.


---

## 頁面 663

642
642 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
Anaesthesia for femoral neck fracture
Procedure Cannulated screws, dynamic hip screw (DhS),
cemented/ uncemented hemiarthroplasty, total
hip replacement
Time 10– 90min
Pain +/ +++
Position Supine (? on hip table), occasionally lateral
Blood loss 250– 750mL
Practical techniques SV LMA and regional block
Spinal ± sedation
ETT + IPPV
hip fractures are common: 767 000 per annum in the 2020 National hip
Fracture Database report39 (80% ♀). Every hospital that does hip fracture
surgery should have a National hip Fracture Database Anaesthesia Lead.
Average age is 84y, and 80% occur in those >75y. In Western society, the
lifetime risk is 18% (women) and 6% (men). The 3mo mortality is 712%,
increasing to 21% at 1y.40
Preoperative
• Physiological reserve is reduced, and comorbidity is common. Ideally,
resuscitation should start as soon as the patient is admitted to hospital.
Thorough preoperative assessment must take place, and surgery should
be scheduled for the earliest possible daytime session.
• Patients should be risk- assessed prior to surgery, e.g. with the
Nottingham hip Fracture Score, a frailty score and the 4AT delirium
score.2
• Surgical treatment can be either fracture fixation or femoral head
replacement, depending on the nature of the fracture, surgical
preference, previous mobility and life expectancy.
• Determine which procedure is to be performed (Table 23.6). Cannulated
hip screws are quick, largely non-i nvasive procedures with a small incision
and little blood loss. Cemented/u ncemented hemiarthroplasty is a longer
procedure, similar to the femoral part of a 1° hip replacement. DhS/
Richards screw and plate are intermediate procedures.
• Any decision to delay surgery should be based on a realistic attempt
to improve the patient’s medical condition, rather than a fruitless
pursuit of ‘normal’ values. A mild chest infection is unlikely to improve
in a bed- bound elderly patient, whereas frank pneumonia with sepsis
and dyspnoea may respond to rehydration, antibiotics and chest
physiotherapy.
• Surgery should not be delayed pending echocardiography for suspected
valvular disease.2
• hip fracture surgery should take place within 36h of sustaining a
fracture.2
• Many patients will be taking anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy; see
the AoA guideline for advice on specific management2 (see % p. 1109).
• Good communication between the surgeons, orthogeriatricians and
anaesthetists is important. There should be a daily multidisciplinary team
discussion of each patient scheduled for surgery.


---

## 頁面 664

ANAESThESIA FOR FEMORAL NECk FRACTURE 643
rumef
fo
kcen
derutcarf
rof serudecorp
lacigruS
6.32
elbaT
setoN
/ssol
doolB
noitisoP
)+++++
ot +(
niaP
)nim(
emiT
noitpircseD
noitarepO
hctam
-X
llams ,evisavni
yllaminiM
liN
pih
,enipuS
+++
02
kcen
laromef
ssorca
swercS
swercs
detalunnaC
enod
eb naC
.noisicni
hgiht
elbat
)’swercs
nedraG‘
ylsuoiverp(
kcolb evren
/lacol
htiw
.yrassecen
fi
,noitades
dna
dediug
-yar
-X
hgiht regral
tahwemoS
Lm004<
pih
,enipuS
++
54
–03
htiw
,rumef
gnola
etalP
etalp
dna
wercs
sdrahciR
.ssol
doolb
/noisicni
elbat
otni
wercs
noisserpmoc
)PSR(
dediug
-yar
-X
daeh
laromef
PSR
sA
Lm004<
pih
,enipuS
++
54
–03
PSR
sA
)ShD(
wercs
pih
cimanyD
elbat
PSR
sA
Lm004<
pih
,enipuS
++
54
–03
PSR
sA
noisserpmoc
cimanyD
elbat
)SCD(
wercs
eht
swohs
yduts
tnecer
A
laretaL
ohw
esoht
ot dereffO
09–06
tnemecalper
pih latot
rof
sA
tnemecalper
pih
latoT
serudecorp
°2
fo
ecnedicni
klaw
ot
elba
erew
reffid ton
seod
y2
retfa
dna
yltnednepedni
stneitap
neewteb
yltnacfiingis
ylevitingoc
ton
erew
pih latot
eviecer
ohw
roF
.erutcarferp
deriapmi
ohw
esoht dna
ytsalporhtra
raluspacartni
decalpsid
24ytsalporhtraimeh
eviecer
serutcarf
enipuS
raluspacartxe
roF
nim06
–54
raluspacartxe
rof desU
lian
yralludemartnI
serutcarf
serutcarf


---

## 頁面 665

644
644 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
• Dehydration is common, as oral intake is often much reduced. IV fluids
must be commenced as soon as the patient is admitted to hospital.
• Analgesia should be commenced, as often the patient is in considerable
pain. A fascia iliaca block instituted in an ED setting can provide
‘dynamic’ analgesia and reduces the requirement for opioids.41
Perioperative
• For fracture fixation, the patient is usually positioned supine on a
‘hip table’. This involves placement of a groin prop, with the table
supporting the upper body only. Feet are tied into shoe supports,
and the table is then elevated to allow radiographic screening. For
hemiarthroplasty, the patient is lateral or supine on an ordinary
operating table.
• Blood loss is variable. Much of the measured loss is old haematoma, but
significant haemorrhage may occur and necessitate transfusion.
• Transfusion trigger is controversial but should be 90g/ L.43
• Choice of anaesthetic technique. Regional anaesthesia and GA are
both advocated, but the recent emphasis is on the maintenance of
physiological stability, particularly maintenance of BP.2,44,45
• Peripheral nerve blocks should be used routinely to supplement GA or
spinal anaesthesia (see % pp. 1135–44).2
• Sedation may be necessary, but any sedative can produce
unpredictable effects in the elderly and should only be used when
necessary.
• Check pressure points after placement on the ‘hip table’, as these
patients are prone to pressure damage.
• Use some form of passive or active warming device to prevent
hypothermia. Insulate the head, and secure a warming blanket/
polythene sheet around the chest and lower abdomen.
• BCIS is a problem with hip fracture (see % p. 615).11,12,13
• Take care to avoid intraoperative hypotension.
Postoperative
• Pain is often only due to the incision, which is small for cannulated
screws and DhS, but larger for hemiarthroplasty, although DhS
procedures may cause a considerable amount of postoperative pain.46
• Fracture pain will be reduced but is still present on rolling and turning
in bed.
• Postoperative analgesia can be provided by regular IV paracetamol;
opioids should be used sparingly.47 Most patients will require some
postoperative analgesia, although some do not. Take care with NSAIDs
because of the i risk of GI and renal complications (see % p. 91;
% pp. 1155–6).
• Some patients may require a period of monitoring in the post-
anaesthesia care unit, hDU or ICU postoperatively.2
Special considerations
• In high- risk patients, procedures can be undertaken with LA alone.
• Morbidity and mortality risks should be understood by the patient and
relatives, and in some patients, the resuscitation status should be reviewed.
• A useful resource for all anaesthetists involved in the management of
hip fracture patients is the NhS hip Fracture Perioperative Network.48


---

## 頁面 666

ANAESThESIA FOR FEMORAL NECk FRACTURE 645
References
1 National Joint Registry (2020). 17th Annual report. National Registry for England, Wales and
Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man. Surgical data to 31 December 2019. https://reports.
njrcentre.org.uk/Portals/0/PDFdownloads/NJR%2017th%20Annual%20Report%202020.pdf
2 Griffiths R, Babu S, Dixon P, et al. (2021). Guideline for the management of hip fractures 2020.
Guideline by the Association of Anaesthetists. Anaesthesia, 76, 225– 37.
3 harrop-G riffiths W, Cook T, Gill h, et al. (2013). Regional anaesthesia and patients with abnor-
malities of coagulation. Anaesthesia, 68, 966– 72.
4 Royal College of Anaesthetists (2018). National Audit Project 6 Summary. M https:// www.
nationalauditprojects.org.uk/ downloads/ NAP6%20Chapter%206%20- %20Summary%20of%20
main%20findings.pdf
5 Salmasi V, Maheshwari k, yang D, et al. (2017). Relationship between intraoperative hypotension,
defined by either reduction from baseline or absolute thresholds, and acute kidney and myocar-
dial injury after noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology, 126, 47– 65.
6 National Institute for health and Care Excellence (2020). Joint replacement (primary): hip, knee
and shoulder. NICE guideline [NG157]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng157
7 Memtsoudis SG, Sun X, Chiu yL, et al. (2013). Perioperative comparative effectiveness of anes-
thetic technique in orthopedic patients. Anesthesiology, 118, 1046– 58.
8 hunt LP, Ben-S hlomo y, Clark EM, et al. (2013). 90 day mortality after 409,096 total hip replace-
ments for osteoarthritis, from the NJR for England & Wales: a retrospective analysis. Lancet, 382,
1097– 104.
9 Newbigin k, Souza CA, Torres C, et al. (2016). Fat embolism syndrome: state- of- the- art review
focused on pulmonary image findings. Respir Med, 113, 93– 100.
10 Gurd AR, Wilson RI (1974). The fat embolism syndrome. J Bone Joint Surg, 56B, 408– 16.
11 Donaldson AJ, Thomson hE, harper NJ, et al. (2009). Bone cement implantation syndrome. Br J
Anaesth, 102, 12– 22.
12 healthcare quality Improvement Partnership (2014). Falls and Fragility Fracture Audit Programme,
National Hip Fracture Database, Anaesthesia Sprint Audit of Practice (ASAP). M https:// www.nhfd.
co.uk/ 20/ hipfractureR.nsf/ vwContent/ asapReport/ $file/ onlineASAP.pdf
13 Griffiths R, White SM, Moppett Ik, et al. (2015). Safety guideline: reducing the risk from ce-
mented hemiarthroplasty for hip fracture 2015. Anaesthesia, 70, 623– 6.
14 Deloughry JL, Griffiths R (2009). Arterial tourniquets. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain,
9, 56– 60.
15 Boogaerts JG (1999). Lower limb exsanguinations and embolism. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg, 50, 95– 8.
16 hirota k, hashimoto h, kabara S, et al. (2001). The relationship between pneumatic tourniquet
time and the amount of pulmonary emboli in patients undergoing knee arthroscopic surgeries.
Anesth Analg, 93, 776– 8.
17 Satsumae T, yamaguchi h, Sakaguchi M, et al. (2001). Preoperative small dose ketamine pre-
vented tourniquet induced arterial pressure increase in orthopaedic patients under general anes-
thesia. Anesth Analg, 92, 1286– 9.
18 kam PC, kavanaugh R, yoong FF (2001). The arterial tourniquet: pathophysiological conse-
quences and anaesthetic implications. Anaesthesia, 56, 534– 6.
19 Muñoz M, Acheson AG, Auerbach M, et al. (2017). International consensus statement on the
peri- operative management of anaemia and iron deficiency. Anaesthesia, 72, 233– 47.
20 Guay J, Johnson RL, kopp S (2017). Nerve blocks or no nerve blocks for pain control after
elective hip replacement (arthroplasty) surgery in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 10,
CD011608.
21 Grevstad U, Mathiesen O, Lind T, et al. (2014). Effect of adductor canal block on pain in patients
with severe pain after total knee arthroplasty: a randomized study with individual patient analysis.
Br J Anaesth, 112, 912– 19.
22 Andersen LO, Gaarn-L arsen L, kristensen BB, husted h, Otte kS, kehlet h (2010). Analgesic ef-
ficacy of local anaesthetic in knee arthroplasty: volume v concentration. Anaesthesia, 65, 984– 90.
23 Bandolier. Surgery for arthritic knees. M http:// www.bandolier.org.uk/ band102/ b102- 3.html
24 Rattenberry W, hertling A, Erskine R (2019). Spinal anaesthesia for ambulatory surgery. BJA
Educ, 19, 321– 8.
25 Menigaux C, Guignard B, Fletcher D, et al. (2001). Intraoperative small-d ose ketamine enhances
analgesia after outpatient arthroscopy. Anesth Analg, 93, 606– 12.
26 Raw DA, Beattie Jk, hunter JM (2003). Anaesthesia for spinal surgery in adults. Br J Anaesth, 91,
886– 904.
27 Nowicki RWA (2014). Anaesthesia for major spinal surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain,
14, 147– 52.


---

## 頁面 667

646
646 ChAPTER 23 Orthopaedic surgery
28 young CD, McLuckie D, Spencer AO (2019). Anaesthetic care for surgical management of ado-
lescent idiopathic scoliosis. BJA Educ, 19, 232– 7.
29 Feix B, Sturgess J (2014). Anaesthesia in the prone position. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain,
14, 291– 7.
30 Levin DN, Strantzas S, Steinberg BE (2019). Intraoperative neuromonitoring in paediatric spinal
surgery. BJA Educ, 19, 165– 71.
31 hewson DW, Oldman M, Bedforth NM (2019). Regional anaesthesia for shoulder surgery. BJA
Educ, 19, 98– 104.
32 Beecroft C, Coventry DM (2008). Anaesthesia for shoulder surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit
Care Pain, 8, 193– 8.
33 Vorobeichik L, Brull R, Bowry R, et al. (2018). Should continuous rather than single-i njection
interscalene block be routinely offered for major shoulder surgery? A meta- analysis of the anal-
gesic and side- effects profiles. Br J Anaesth, 120, 679– 92.
34 Royal College of Anaesthetists, Association of Anaesthetists, Regional Anaesthesia United
kingdom (2020). Nerve blocks for surgery on the shoulder, arm or hand. [Information for pa-
tients and families] M https:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ sites/ default/ files/ documents/ 2020- 05/ 10-
NerveBlocks2020web_ 0.pdf
35 Pandit JJ, Andrade J, Bogod D, et al.; Royal College of Anaesthetists, Association of Anaesthetists
of Great Britain and Ireland (2014). 5th National Audit Project (NAP5) on accidental awareness
during general anaesthesia: summary of main findings and risk factors. Br J Anaesth, 113, 549– 59.
36 kuo L, hsu W, Chi C, et al. (2018). Tranexamic acid in total shoulder arthroplasty and reverse
shoulder arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta-a nalysis. BMC Musculoskelet Disord, 19, 60.
37 Pandya J, Johnson T, Low Ak (2018). Shoulder replacement for osteoarthritis: a review of sur-
gical management. Maturitas, 108, 71– 6.
38 Brown AR (2002). Anaesthesia for procedures of the hand and elbow. Best Pract Res Clin
Anaesthesiol, 16, 227– 46.
39 Royal College of Physicians (2020). National Hip Fracture Database Report 2020 annual report
https://www.nhfd.co.uk/files/2020ReportFiles/NhFD_Annual_Report_2020.pdf
40 Parker MJ, Pryor GA, Myles J (2000). 11 year results in 2,846 patients of the Peterborough
hip fracture project: reduced morbidity, mortality and hospital stay. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand,
71, 34– 8.
41 Foss NB, kristensen BB, Bundgaard M, et al. (2007). Fascia iliaca compartment blockade for
acute pain control in hip fracture patients: a randomized, placebo- controlled trial. Anesthesiology,
106, 773– 8.
42 hEALTh Investigators; Bhandari M, Einhorn TA, Guyatt G, et al. (2019). Total hip arthroplasty or
hemiarthroplasty for hip fracture. N Engl J Med, 381, 2199– 208.
43 klein AA, Arnold P, Bingham R, et al. (2016), AAGBI guidelines: the use of blood components
and their alternatives 2016. Anaesthesia, 71, 829– 42.
44 White SM, Moppett Ik, Griffiths R, et al. (2016). Secondary analysis of outcomes after 11,085
hip fracture operations from the prospective Uk Anaesthesia Sprint Audit of Practice (ASAP- 2).
Anaesthesia, 71, 506– 14.
45 Neuman MD, Silber Jh, Elkassabany NM, et al. (2012). Comparative effectiveness of regional
versus general anesthesia for hip fracture surgery in adults. Anesthesiology, 117, 72– 92.
46 Foss NB, kristensen MT, Palm h, et al. (2009). Postoperative pain after hip fracture is procedure
specific. Br J Anaesth, 102, 111– 16.
47 Cuvillon P, Ripart J, Debureaux S, et al. (2007). [Analgesia after hip fracture repair in elderly pa-
tients: the effect of a continuous femoral nerve block: a prospective and randomised study]. Ann
Fr Anesth Réanim, 26, 2– 9.
48 NhS Networks. Hip Fracture Perioperative Network (HipPeN). M http:// www.networks.nhs.uk/
nhs- networks/ hip- fracture- anaesthesia


---
