# Chapter 24: Plastic and Burns Surgery 整形與燒傷麻醉

## 頁面 668

Chapter 24 664477
Plastic and burns surgery
Brian Chen, Simon Davis and Fynn Maguire
General principles 648
Breast surgery 653
Breast reduction 656
Breast augmentation 658
Free flap surgery 659
Liposuction 662
Skin grafting and burns reconstructive surgery 664
See also
% Burns: early management pp. 1013–18


---

## 頁面 669

648
648 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
General principles
the complexity of anaesthesia for plastic and burns surgery ranges from
the routine to the challenging. Some extensive procedures (e.g. free flap
repairs, craniofacial reconstruction) may involve invasive monitoring, exten-
sive blood loss and postoperative intensive care support. See table 24.1 for
a range of plastic surgical procedures.
Regional techniques and sedation
Minor body surface procedures may be performed under La infiltration
alone. Significant body surface procedures in those unfit for Ga, such as
excision and grafting of skin tumours, can be accomplished using extensive
infiltration of La and IV sedation. Upper and lower limb surgery is especially
suitable for regional anaesthesia. Consider the surgical site, placement of
tourniquets and the location of split skin grafts (SSGs), if required, when
deciding on the best regional block. Long procedures or those which would
benefit from ongoing regional sympatholysis, such as digit reimplantation,
would benefit from a regional catheter. Sedation to supplement a regional
technique may be required in anxious patients or for longer or extensive
procedures. Use any sedative technique which is familiar and appropriate
for the patient’s physiology, ideally with an agent which is easily titratable.
propofol (0.5–1 .0 micrograms/ mL tCI or 10– 15mL/h of 1% solution), with
or without supplemental midazolam (1–2 mg), is effective. alternatively,
remifentanil (0.5– 1.0 nanograms/ mL tCI or 5mL/ h of 1mg in 20mL solu-
tion) offers both sedation and analgesia, and respiratory depression can be
avoided if the infusion rate is slowly titrated upward.
The difficult airway
(See also % pp. 363–4.) patients with head and neck pathology causing
airway difficulty are often encountered. airway difficulty may arise from
anatomical deformity due to tumour, trauma, infection, previous oper-
ations, radiotherapy or scarring. Competence in difficult airway techniques
(e.g. awake intubation) is required. the ‘shared airway’ is regularly a feature
of head and neck surgery. Discuss with the surgeon which tube you pro-
pose to use and by which route to achieve the best surgical access (oral,
nasal, conversion to tracheostomy) and how the tube will be secured (tied,
taped, stitched).
Poor access to the patient
the operating site may be extensive (e.g. burns debridement) or multiple
(e.g. free flap procedures). this may produce added difficulty with:
• heat conservation: it may be difficult to achieve enough access to
the patient’s body surface area to maintain temperature. heated
underblankets are useful.
• Monitoring: eCG leads, the pulse oximeter probe and the Bp cuff may
all be difficult to position adequately.
• Vascular access: position cannulae away from the operative field. Use
femoral vessels or the foot, if necessary. Long extension sets may be
required.


---

## 頁面 670

GeneraL prInCIpLeS 649
Long operations
patients undergoing complicated reconstructive procedures may be in
theatre for many hours. Give careful consideration to:
Vascular access Check that line placement will not interfere with the site of
surgery. Invasive arterial monitoring is desirable. a central venous line can
assist with estimations of the intravascular volume and provide dependable
venous access in the postoperative period. Site at least one large-b ore
peripheral (14–1 6G) cannula for fluid administration and a small cannula
(20– 22G) for other infusions such as tCI and pCa.
Blood loss ensure blood has been X-m atched. the initial dissection is usually
the period of most blood loss, and a moderate hypotensive technique may
help to limit this. thereafter, losses may be insidious and ongoing. aim
to keep track by swab weighing, visual estimation and regular hb or hct
measurement. non- invasive CO monitoring can help optimise the fluid
status. assessment of stroke volume, flow time or SVV, using devices such
as LiDCO™, may give valuable information to the anaesthetist.
Fluid balance Urinary catheterisation is essential. ensure careful monitoring of
fluid balance, especially in children and patients with poor cardiorespiratory
function.
Body temperature Monitor the core temperature (e.g. rectal, nasopharyngeal,
oesophageal). Maintain the temperature by using low FGFs, an hMe filter,
warmed IV fluids, a warm ambient theatre temperature (e.g. 24°C), a
heated mattress or a forced air warming blanket. take care not to overheat
the patient.
Positioning ensure that structures, such as the cervical spine and brachial
plexus, are not in positions of stress. take care with pressure areas. pad
bony prominences and raise the heels off the table.
VTE DVt prophylaxis is often initiated during surgery. all patients should
have thromboembolism compression stockings and intermittent calf
compression while in theatre, and be assessed for daily LMWh.
NGT Consider emptying the stomach. Children are especially prone to
gastric distension during prolonged procedures.
Eye care Lightly tape and pad the eyes for protection. avoid excessive
padding, since this may negate the natural protection afforded by the bony
orbit. prophylactic antibiotic ointment is unnecessary. Do not allow corneal
abrasion to develop from surface drying. a simple eye ointment is helpful if
the eyes are left uncovered.
ETT cuff pressure Cuff pressure will gradually increase if n
2
O is used.
Where possible, recheck the cuff pressure at intervals during the case.
Postoperative care Discuss the preferred site of postoperative care with the
nursing staff and surgical team. Surgeons often prefer patients to return
to the plastic surgery ward where wound care and nursing observation
may be more attuned to the specifics of the operation. Closer patient
observation, invasive monitoring and regular blood gas estimation may be
more achievable in an ICU/ hDU. the site for immediate postoperative
care is principally dictated by the general condition of the patient.


---

## 頁面 671

650
650 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Table 24.1 Miscellaneous plastic surgical procedures
Operation Description Time Pain Position Blood Notes
(min) (+ to loss/
+++++) X- match
abdomino- excision of 120 ++ to Supine G&S LMa or
plasty redundant +++ ett, IppV
lower
abdominal skin
Carpal release of 30 + Supine, nil La
tunnel flexor sheath arm (tourni- infiltration,
release at the wrist board quet) brachial
to relieve plexus block
median nerve or day case
entrapment Ga
Dupuytren’s excision of 60– 90 + Supine, nil Brachial
contracture contracted arm (tourni- plexus block
palmar fascia board quet) or day case
Ga
external excision of 30 + Supine, nil LMa and SV
angular congenital head
dermoid dermoid ring
cyst, usually
from lateral
supraorbital
ridge
Flexor/ repair of 30– 120 + to Supine, nil Brachial
extensor hand tendons ++ arm (tourni- plexus block
tendon following board quet) ± Ga, LMa
repair trauma. Often and SV,
multiple. May IppV for
be extensive. extensive
May involve repairs
nerve/ vessel
repairs
Gynaeco- excision or 45 + to Supine nil LMa and SV
mastia liposuction ++
of excess ♂
breast tissue
hypo- Correction 90 ++ Supine nil LMa and
spadias of congenital SV. Caudal
repair abnormality or penile
of ♂ urethra. block
Usually infant
Insertion SC insertion of 45 + to Supine, nil LMa and SV
of tissue 0.9% sodium ++ head
expander chloride- filled ring
silicone bags,
often scalp


---

## 頁面 672

GeneraL prInCIpLeS 651
Operation Description Time Pain Position Blood Notes
(min) (+ to loss/
+++++) X- match
neck, axilla Block 90– 120 ++ Supine, 2 units LMa or
and groin dissection of head ett, IppV
dissection regional lymph ring
nodes to excise
2° malignant
disease
Otoplasty Uni- / bilateral 60 + Supine, nil paediatric
correction of 30° patients.
prominent ears head up Flexible
LMa and SV.
Day case
preauricular excision of 45 + Supine, nil LMa and SV
sinus congenital sinus head
tract, often ring
bilateral
pretibial excision of 45 + to Supine nil Spinal or
laceration pretibial wound ++ Ga
and SSG
rhytid- Cosmetic 180– + to Supine, nil LMa or
ectomy facelift, 240 ++ 30° ett, IppV.
occasionally head up permissive
combined hypotension
with septo-
rhinoplasty
Syndactyly release of 60– 180 ++ Supine nil LMa and
congenital (tourni- SV. ett +
fusion of quet) IppV for
two or more extensive
digits. May be repairs
bilateral. May
require full-
thickness skin
graft (FtSG)


|  |
| --- |
| Operation Description Time Pain Position Blood Notes
(min) (+ to loss/
+++++) X- match |
| neck, axilla Block 90– 120 ++ Supine, 2 units LMa or
and groin dissection of head ett, IppV
dissection regional lymph ring
nodes to excise
2° malignant
disease
Otoplasty Uni- / bilateral 60 + Supine, nil paediatric
correction of 30° patients.
prominent ears head up Flexible
LMa and SV.
Day case
preauricular excision of 45 + Supine, nil LMa and SV
sinus congenital sinus head
tract, often ring
bilateral
pretibial excision of 45 + to Supine nil Spinal or
laceration pretibial wound ++ Ga
and SSG
rhytid- Cosmetic 180– + to Supine, nil LMa or
ectomy facelift, 240 ++ 30° ett, IppV.
occasionally head up permissive
combined hypotension
with septo-
rhinoplasty
Syndactyly release of 60– 180 ++ Supine nil LMa and
congenital (tourni- SV. ett +
fusion of quet) IppV for
two or more extensive
digits. May be repairs
bilateral. May
require full-
thickness skin
graft (FtSG) |
|  |


---

## 頁面 673

652
652 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Smooth emergence
avoid the patient coughing and straining at the end of the procedure. this
will put tension on delicate suture lines and increase bleeding and haema-
toma formation, especially for facial procedures. Deep extubation, deep
conversion of ett to LMa (Bailey manoeuvre), extubation with a run-
ning remifentanil infusion or IV lidocaine 1.0mg/k g bolus 2min prior to
extubation can smooth emergence.
Analgesia
• Most procedures are performed on the body surface. these tend to be
less painful than procedures involving the body cavities and are usually
amenable to La infiltration or regional block. Continuous catheter
techniques may be useful in limb procedures.
• patients recovering from head and neck procedures are often
surprisingly comfortable despite extensive surgery.
• Major body cavities and abdominal musculature are usually not involved.
the pain experienced after an abdominoplasty is significantly less than
pain following a laparotomy.
• plastic surgery procedures seldom involve new fractures of long bones.
• the GI tract is usually unaffected. the oral route for drugs is frequently
available, which may make dosing and administration of analgesics
simpler.
Attention to detail
Successful anaesthesia for plastic surgery requires careful attention to de-
tail. patients for aesthetic surgery will have high expectations and will be
well informed.


---

## 頁面 674

BreaSt SUrGery 653
Breast surgery
General considerations
Breast cancer is now the commonest cancer in the UK, and the incidence
has i by >20% over the last 25y. Mortality from breast cancer, however, has
fallen steadily since 1990, probably because of earlier detection and improved
treatment. Over this time, there have been significant advances in more ex-
tensive combined procedures of breast resection and reconstruction. radical
mastectomy is now rarely indicated, as better efficacy is shown for breast-
conserving treatment, such as wide local excision of tumour, in addition to
chemotherapy or radiotherapy, compared to full mastectomy alone. the min-
imally invasive technique of sentinel lymph node biopsy has now predomin-
antly replaced axillary lymph node dissection for breast cancer staging.
Preoperative
anxiety is often high. It is important to gain the patient’s confidence at the
preoperative visit, discuss analgesia and prescribe anxiolysis if necessary.
• adverse effects from any neoadjuvant therapies should be considered
and optimised. patients who have recently undergone chemotherapy
may be immunocompromised. Check FBC for evidence of bone
marrow suppression and anticipate potentially difficult venous access.
• reconstructive procedures, mastectomy following radiotherapy,
mastectomy where breasts are large and breast reduction surgery increase
the risk of blood loss. Check hb and ensure blood is grouped and screened.
Perioperative
LMa and SV are often appropriate for short- to medium-l ength procedures.
Use intubation and mechanical ventilation for prolonged procedures, the
obese and patients at risk of aspiration.
• avoid placing venous access on the side of surgery.
• Standard monitoring is appropriate for most procedures. Longer
procedures will require active warming and temperature measurement.
• additional invasive monitoring may be required for prolonged
reconstructive procedures, including free flap surgery.
• Give multimodal analgesia, including nSaID, systemic opioid and
regional techniques, if possible.
• Breast surgery patients are at high risk of pOnV. avoid causative
agents, and administer prophylactic antiemetics. tIVa may be useful.
• Beware of the blue dyes used in sentinel lymph node biopsy as they
have been associated with anaphylaxis.
Regional analgesia
regional techniques may offer advantages in some cases; however, the risks
in healthy women undergoing minor procedures may outweigh the benefits.
• Consider regional techniques for more radical procedures, e.g. radical
mastectomy/ axillary clearance and breast reconstruction.
• regional techniques include paravertebral block, thoracic epidural,
interfascial plane (pectoral nerve and serratus anterior plane) blocks,
intercostal blocks and intrapleural block. Beware of the complications
of each technique. an ultrasound-g uided approach is advocated.
• recent evidence suggested that breast surgery supplemented by a
paravertebral block does not reduce the risk of cancer recurrence.1


---

## 頁面 675

654
654 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Postoperative
• Minor procedures, including wide local excision with sentinel lymph
node biopsy, could be suitable for day case surgery.
• hDU may be required after extensive procedures.
• If a paravertebral catheter or thoracic epidural is sited, continue infusion
postoperatively.
Special considerations
patients may present with previous breast surgery and axillary clearance.
Cannulation should be avoided in the arm on the affected side due to the
risk of infection and potential development of lymphoedema. there is
limited evidence of the risk of short- term cannulation on the affected side,
and if venous access is limited, it may be appropriate to use the affected side
and remove at the end of the case.
• Chronic pain, typically presenting in the affected anterior chest wall,
ipsilateral axilla or upper arm, may occur following breast surgery.
Incidence is as high as 20– 50% after mastectomy. Intensity of the
pain following extensive surgery, postoperative radiotherapy and
chemotherapy are risk factors.
• Breast reconstruction following mastectomy is common. the two main
methods include implant- based or autologous tissue flap reconstruction.
the tissue flap can be transferred as a free flap or a pedicled flap.
Options for flap reconstructions are listed in table 24.2.
References
1 Sessler DI, pei L, huang y, et al. (2019). recurrence of breast cancer after regional or general
anaesthesia: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 394, 1807– 15.


---

## 頁面 676

BreaSt SUrGery 655
Table 24.2 types of tissue flap reconstruction
Type Donor site Free or pedicled Harvest position
flap
Abdomen
traM transverse rectus Free or pedicled Supine
abdominis muscle
DIep Deep inferior epigastric Free Supine
perforator
SIea Superficial inferior Free Supine
epigastric artery
Back
Latissimus Latissimus dorsi muscle pedicled Lateral decubitus
dorsi
Lap Lumbar artery perforator Free prone
Hip/ buttock
Gluteal Superior gluteal artery Free prone or lateral
perforator, inferior gluteal decubitus
artery perforator
DCIa Deep circumflex iliac Free Supine
artery
Thigh
pap profunda femoris artery Free Supine or prone
perforator
tUG transverse upper gracilis Free Supine
muscle
tFL tensor fasciae latae Free Supine
LttF Lateral transverse thigh Free Supine
aLt anterolateral thigh Free Supine


---

## 頁面 677

656
656 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Breast reduction
procedure reduction of breast size by glandular resection. Usually
bilateral
time 3h
pain ++
position Supine, 30° head- up, periodic deck- chair. arms may be
positioned on boards, or with elbows flexed and hands
placed behind the upper part of the buttocks
Blood loss 500mL, G&S
practical IppV via ett or LMa
techniques
Preoperative
Bilateral breast reduction is not primarily an aesthetic procedure. these
patients may suffer from severe neck and back pain. participating in ex-
ercise and sport is not possible. there may be symptoms of emotional
disturbance.
• patients are usually fit; aged 20– 40y. Many surgeons exclude patients
with a BMI >30 due to a higher incidence of wound breakdown,
infection and haematoma formation.
• a mastopexy is a surgical procedure for correcting breast ptosis when
breast volume is adequate. anaesthetic implications are similar. Blood
loss is less.
• Check FBC and G&S. X- matching is generally unnecessary, except for
larger reductions.
• timing in relation to the menstrual cycle is unimportant.
• all patients should receive DVt prophylaxis (compression stockings,
daily LMWh).
Perioperative
• IppV may be preferable, since the surgeon often puts pressure on the
chest wall during surgery. IppV will maintain satisfactory chest expansion
with good aeration and control of paCO, and help minimise blood loss.
2
an LMa may be satisfactory for IppV.
• place eCG electrodes on the patient’s back. Lie the patient on
incontinence pads to absorb blood loss.
• take care to position the patient carefully on the operating table. the
anaesthetic machine is usually at the head end. ensure that the chest
and arms are symmetrical. Confirm that vascular cannulae are secured
well and padded if the hands are to be positioned behind the buttocks.
Local pressure damage to the skin may otherwise ensue.
• the patient may be placed in a deck-c hair position briefly multiple
times throughout the operation to allow the surgeon to check breast
symmetry. the position changes mandate care with securing airway,
vascular access, monitoring and maintenance of Cpp.
• Blood loss depends on the surgical technique. Use of cutting diathermy
causes less bleeding than a scalpel. Infiltration with dilute adrenaline-
containing La helps reduce blood loss. all surgeons have their own
recipe. Check the dosage being used; in practice, this is seldom a
concern (see % p. 1102).


---

## 頁面 678

BreaSt reDUCtIOn 657
• Fewer than 5% of patients require transfusion. Mild falls in hb are well
tolerated in this young patient group.
• Moderate reductions may involve removal of 500g of tissue per breast.
Postoperative
• Bilateral breast reduction does not cause significant postoperative pain.
Following a dose of morphine towards the end of surgery, regular
simple analgesics and nSaIDs are usually adequate. IV pCa is generally
unnecessary.
• haematoma formation is an early complication. Occasionally, nipple
perfusion may be compromised and requires decompression of the
pedicle. return to theatre may be indicated. Later complications include
wound infection, dehiscence and fat necrosis.
Special considerations
Occasionally, patients for massive breast reduction are encountered
(>1kg of tissue removal per breast). two to 4 units of blood should be
X- matched. the complication rate is higher.


---

## 頁面 679

658
658 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Breast augmentation
procedure Bilateral or unilateral augmentation of breast size
time 90min
pain ++/ +++
position Supine, 30° head- up. arms may be out on boards, or with
elbows flexed and hands placed behind the upper part of
the buttocks
Blood loss Minimal
practical SV or IppV via LMa
techniques
Preoperative
Breast augmentation may be performed for:
• reconstruction following mastectomy
• Correction of breast asymmetry
• aesthetic bilateral augmentation.
patients are usually fit and well.
Perioperative
position on the operating table as for breast reduction.
• the four 1° augmentation techniques include inframammary,
periareolar, transaxillary and transumbilical.
Postoperative
postoperative discomfort may be related to the size of the implants. Large
implants cause more tissue stretching and postoperative pain.
• In general, breast augmentation appears to cause more discomfort than
breast reduction. Give regular simple analgesics. Opioid analgesia may
be needed, but pCa techniques are seldom required.
• haematoma formation may require early return to theatre. Later
complications include infection, capsule formation and rupture.
Special considerations
an association between silicone breast implants and the development of
systemic symptoms of connective tissue diseases has been suggested. this
association has not been proven, following data from large studies.
• Soybean oil- filled implants have been withdrawn from use in the UK.
there are insufficient data concerning the long-t erm consequences
of soybean oil breakdown. Sodium chloride 0.9% implants are not
perceived as sufficiently realistic and are unpopular with many women.


---

## 頁面 680

Free FLap SUrGery 659
Free flap surgery
procedure the transfer of tissue from a donor site and micro-
vascular anastomosis to a distant recipient site
time Variable, depending on procedure, often 6– 8h or longer
pain ++/ +++
position Variable.Usually supine. May require position change
during surgery
Blood loss Variable, G&S to X-m atch 4– 6 units
practical ett + IppV, arterial line, CO monitoring, urinary cath-
techniques eter, patient warming
Preoperative
a free flap is a transfer of tissue with its blood supply from one part of the
body to another when the vessels are disconnected during the transfer and
microvascularly reanastomosed to a new artery and vein at or near the re-
cipient site. the transferred tissue volume may contain skin, muscle, nerve,
fascia and bone. Free flaps are commonly used to provide tissue cover for
large defects following trauma or resection for malignancy, or when com-
plex tissue is required to regain normal aesthetics or function.
• Surgical success depends on establishing and maintaining adequate
flap perfusion. hypercoagulable states, such as sickle- cell anaemia and
polycythaemia, are contraindications to surgery. Smokers should be
advised to stop smoking for at least 4w before surgery due to nicotine-
induced vasoconstriction, carbon monoxide (CO)- related tissue
hypoxia and blood hypercoagulability caused by i platelet aggregation.
In oncology patients, consider chemotherapy- related organ system
dysfunction and anticipate difficulty gaining IV access.
• elderly patients with head and neck cancer are often heavy smokers and
drinkers and may have significant cardiac and respiratory comorbidity, as
well as poor nutritional state. their airway anatomy may be distorted,
especially with previous head and neck surgery or radiotherapy,
increasing the risk of a difficult intubation.
Perioperative
the physiological aim of anaesthesia is to optimise circulatory flow through
the grafted flap. anaesthetic management is largely guided by 1st principles
and application of the hagen– poiseuille equation:
πpr4
Q=
8ηl
where Q = flow rate, Δp = pressure gradient, r = vessel radius, l = vessel
length, and η = blood viscosity.
the variables which can be controlled by the anaesthetist are pressure
gradient, viscosity and vessel radius.
• Free flap surgery is a long procedure on multiple body sites and all patients
should have a Ga. pain often originates from the flap donor site or from
SSGs taken to cover deficits in either the donor or the recipient site and a
regional block of these areas adds to effective analgesia. the flap itself is
denervated and insensate and the recipient site is often relatively pain-f ree.


---

## 頁面 681

660
660 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
• either propofol or volatile maintenance can be justified. propofol lowers
SVr, is rapidly metabolised and is an antiemetic, may avoid postoperative
shivering and may be more favourable to microvascular circulation by
avoiding the effect of volatiles on red cell membrane stiffness. Isoflurane
maintains microcirculatory flow. Sevoflurane may attenuate ischaemic–
reperfusion injury and desflurane has a faster offset. Due to the duration
of surgery, nO should be avoided. the addition of a remifentanil
2
infusion offers intraoperative analgesia and marked vasodilation
controlling arterial pressure, and negates the need for an nMBa.
• Vascular access can be limited if the upper limbs are involved as
flap donor or recipient or the patient has previously undergone
chemotherapy. an arterial line is useful for measuring the hct throughout
surgery and as an additional tool in estimating fluid requirements.
• Viscosity is closely related to hct and rises steeply when hct exceeds
40%. aim for 30– 35% which gives the best balance between blood
viscosity, arterial O content and tissue O delivery.
2 2
• IV fluid is administered to ensure adequate flap perfusion, with the
aim of normovolaemic haemodilution in a patient with lowered
SVr. the disrupted lymphatic system of a flap increases the risk
of interstitial oedema. excessive plasma expansion can disrupt the
endothelial glycocalyx layer and is associated with oedema and flap
failure. Comparative studies between crystalloid and colloid regimens
during microvascular surgery are limited. Crystalloids have a poor
volume- expanding ability and are known for their predisposing effect on
oedema, although colloid use is becoming increasingly uncommon amid
concerns of anaphylaxis and renal injury. regardless of fluid selection,
current practice is fluid- restrictive, not exceeding 6mL/k g/ h. GDFt is
becoming more common as minimally invasive CO monitors using pulse
contour analysis are now widely available.
• the use of vasoconstrictors is a contentious issue. While controlled
hypotension during the initial dissection phase of surgery can reduce
surgical blood loss, a return to normotension during anastomosis of the
flap is targeted to ensure an adequate perfusion pressure through the
tissue. there are fears that systemic vasoconstriction leads to reduced
flap perfusion despite very few good- quality studies to support this.
General advice is judicious use of both fluid and vasoconstrictors, such
as metaraminol, to achieve normotension in a euvolaemic patient.
• hypothermia leads to vasoconstriction, in addition to the i risk of
myocardial ischaemia, perioperative blood loss and surgical site infection.
Intraoperative hypothermia develops in a characteristic pattern whereby
the greatest fall in core temperature is within the first 30–4 5min of
induction. Warming measures should ideally start before induction and
care should be taken to maintain patient temperature throughout surgery
and into the recovery phase. If surgery requires a large body surface area
of the patient to be exposed, consider an underbody heating device or
a forced air warmer. this is in addition to the usual interventions of an
overbody forced air warmer, an hMe filter and IV fluid warming.
• ensure adequate ventilation to normalise arterial pO and pCO. Both
2 2
hypoxia and hypocapnia will cause vasoconstriction, and hypercapnia
can cause sympathetic nervous system stimulation.


---

## 頁面 682

Free FLap SUrGery 661
Postoperative
• aim for a smooth emergence, avoiding any strain on suture lines.
• Vasoconstriction from cold, pain, low circulating volume, hypotension
and hypocapnia will threaten the flap and should be addressed. If
postoperative shivering occurs, exclude hypothermia and consider
treating with a forced air warming device, 0.5– 3mg/ kg IV tramadol or
20– 50mg IV pethidine.
• In addition to regional anaesthesia, oral opioids are usually sufficient.
Consider IV pCa when swallowing is impaired such as with head and
neck flaps. nSaIDs have been associated with flap haematoma, but
selective COX-2 inhibitors, such as celecoxib, have been shown to
be safe.
• Flap observation is a specialised nursing skill and care is often best
provided on the plastic surgery ward. the need to escalate to
critical care will be determined by patient factors. postoperative flap
observation will evaluate the Doppler signal of the arterial supply, flap
colour, capillary refill time, skin turgor, skin temperature and bleeding on
pinprick. Compromised flaps can be salvaged if early detection occurs.
a revision operation on a compromised flap should employ the same
anaesthetic principles to promote optimum flap perfusion.
Special considerations
• the reimplantation of severed digits or limbs should be managed as for
a free flap. a brachial plexus catheter is helpful in managing reimplanted
digits as it provides a continuous vasodilated limb.
• a pedicle flap is constructed when a–V connections remain intact, but
the raised flap is rotated to fill a neighbouring defect. this procedure
requires the same anaesthetic principles to optimise flap circulation.
• Overall free flap survival is >95%; patients in a poor general condition
with coexisting disease have the highest risk of flap failure.


---

## 頁面 683

662
662 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Liposuction
procedure Vacuum aspiration of SC fat via a small skin incision and a
specialised blunt- ended cannula
time Variable 30– 90min
pain +
position Variable, depending on site. Usually supine
Blood loss 1% of the volume of fat aspirated with fluid infiltration
technique
practical Local infiltration with IV sedation/ LMa and SV
techniques
Preoperative
Liposuction is a procedure to manage lipoma, gynaecomastia or reducing
the bulk of transplanted flaps. alternatively, a cosmetic procedure where
adipose tissue is either removed or used for autologous fat grafting.
• In the obese patient, be aware of altered drug pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamic effects and consider associated comorbidities such as
metabolic syndrome, hypertension, DM, IhD and OSa.
• Use caution with patients vulnerable to large doses of adrenaline used
(IhD, MaOI use) or large volume of fluid infiltrated (cardiac or renal
failure).
Perioperative
• the total amount of fat aspirated depends on patient requirement and
surgical judgement.
• Fat is infiltrated with dilute La with adrenaline. Back-a nd- forth
movement of the cannula disrupts fatty tissue, which is then aspirated
by either a suction apparatus or a syringe.
• Injection of fluid helps fat breakdown and aids aspiration. a typical
recipe for an SC infiltration solution would be 1000mL of warmed 0.9%
sodium chloride or hartmann’s solution containing 50–1 00mL of 1%
lidocaine (0.05– 0.1% in final solution) and 1mL of 1:1000 adrenaline.
the ‘Superwet’ technique of 1mL of infiltrate per 1mL of anticipated
aspirate is commonly used.
• the ‘tumescent’ technique refers to a large volume of La/ adrenaline
infiltrate to produce tissue turgor. Developed as an outpatient
technique and performed without additional anaesthesia or sedation.
a total of 3mL of infiltrate per 1mL of aspirate is often used. there is
little evidence that this technique is superior to the Superwet technique,
and it may produce more complications. It may provide unsatisfactory
anaesthesia when used alone, and sedation or Ga may be required.
• Blood loss depends on the volume of La/ adrenaline infiltrate used and
the extent of liposuction required. Loss is 71% of the volume of the
aspirate for the Superwet and tumescent techniques. this may increase
to 40% without SC infiltration.
• extensive liposuction physiologically resembles a burn injury, and large
fluid shifts result. replace aspirate 1:1 with IV crystalloid, although take
caution with the tumescent technique where there is a net fluid gain.
patients with heart failure are at risk of pulmonary oedema.


---

## 頁面 684

LIpOSUCtIOn 663
• While procedural mortality is rare, the leading cause is Vte and
appropriate mechanical and/o r pharmacological prophylaxis should be
utilised.
• Limit total adrenaline dose to 6mg to avoid toxicity. Due to delayed
absorption, peak plasma levels are reached after 3– 5h. patients with
IhD should have the dose limited and be observed over this period.
• Dose safety limits for La infiltration are controversial.
• Doses significantly higher than the conventional lidocaine/a drenaline
toxic dose (7mg/ kg) are often used. this may be possible due to
adrenaline- related vasoconstriction slowing drug absorption, poor
vascularity of fat, sequestration of the lipophilic La into fat and
aspiration of much of the infused solution before the La has been
absorbed. Most studies have shown safety with lidocaine doses of up
to 35mg/ kg, but keep in mind peak plasma levels occur 8– 12h after
infiltration. all facilities performing liposuction should have 20% lipid
emulsion available for managing La toxicity.
Postoperative
• pressure dressings are usually applied.
• encourage oral fluids, and monitor urine output.
• Check hct following extensive liposuction (>2500mL of aspirate).
• Bruising can be considerable.
• Use nSaIDs and simple analgesics for pain relief.
Special considerations
Complications are associated with excessive liposuction. In the UK, aspir-
ation is restricted to 72L of fat. Considerably higher- volume procedures
have been reported, especially in the US (in excess of 10L). Morbidity is
related to high aspiration volume and high lidocaine dosage.


---

## 頁面 685

664
664 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
Skin grafting and burns reconstructive
surgery
procedure Free skin grafts applied to surgically created raw surfaces
following debridement, or to granulating wounds
time Variable 30min to 2h
pain ++/ +++ (especially the donor site)
position Variable. Depends on the area to be grafted. Usually supine
Blood loss nil for simple grafts. extensive debridement and grafting of
burns may require 6– 8 units
practical Ga/ LMa and SV (with lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh
techniques or fascia iliaca block if thigh donor site). Spinal for lower
limb surgery
Preoperative
patients for simple excision and grafting of isolated lesions may be other-
wise well.
• elderly patients for excision/g rafting of skin lesions or pretibial
lacerations may be in poor general health. a local or regional technique
may be preferable to Ga. Sedation may be necessary for long
procedures or in those unable to lie still.
• patients with extensive burns for debridement and grafting require
careful assessment.
Perioperative
Full- thickness skin graft
Consists of the epidermis and dermis. Used in small areas where the thick-
ness, appearance and texture of the skin are important. Usually harvested
with a scalpel. FtSG can be harvested using SC La infiltration with a 27G
needle. the donor site needs to be closed directly. Common sites include:
• post- auricular skin for grafts to the face
• Groin or antecubital fossa to the hand for management of flexion
contractures.
Split skin graft
Consists of the epidermis and a variable portion of the dermis. Much wider
usage than FtSG. Usually harvested with a skin graft knife or a power-
driven dermatome. Donor sites will heal spontaneously within 2w. Donor
sites are chosen according to the amount of skin required, the colour and
texture match and local convenience. Meshing is used to expand the extent
of the area that the graft is required to cover. Common donor sites are the
thigh, the flexor aspect of the forearm, the upper arm and the abdomen.
SSG can be harvested using La cream. It should be applied at least 2h in
advance and covered with an occlusive dressing. anaesthesia does not ex-
tend into the deeper dermis, so the technique is unsuitable for FtSG. the
lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh (LCnt) or fascia iliaca block provides
useful analgesia of a thigh donor site. If regional block is not possible, then
surgical infiltration of La will be useful. excess harvested skin can be stored
at 4°C for 2– 3w.


---

## 頁面 686

SKIn GraFtInG anD BUrnS reCOnStr UCtIVe SUrGery 665
Postoperative
the SSG donor site is a painful wound. Supplement with La (LCnt or
femoral block) where possible. the type of dressing is important for donor
site healing and comfort. Common dressings used are alginate dressings or
an adhesive retention tape (such as Mefix®). Dressings are removed once
the donor site has healed in 2–3 w. nSaIDs and simple analgesics are usually
required for 3– 4d. Itching follows when the acute pain settles and healing
is under way.
Acute burns surgery
(See also % pp. 1013–18.) extensive debridement and grafting of burns
are major procedures. Current management is to aim to debride burnt
tissue and cover at the earliest opportunity (often within 48h). Debrided
areas may be covered with autograft (SSG or FtSG taken from healthy skin
on the patient), allograft (skin from cadaveric donors) or a range of com-
plex burns dressings. this converts the burn to a healthy surgical wound.
potential sources of sepsis are eradicated; fluid shifts are less, and intensive
care management tends to be more stable. Wounds not covered with auto-
graft will require further surgery in the following weeks to cover the wound
fully with the patient’s own skin. this process may take many weeks of
repeated procedures.
• two anaesthetists may be required. two surgical teams will
considerably speed up the procedure and help minimise complications.
• ensure 6–8 units of red cells are X- matched. Debrided tissue bleeds
freely. Losses can be rapid and difficult to estimate, particularly in
small children. regularly check hct, and maintain at 730%. Correct
coagulopathy. Massive transfusion may be required.
• perform a careful airway assessment: intubation is required for all but
the smallest of burn debridements. Face mask ventilation may be made
difficult by facial burns and the presence of feeding tubes. Laryngoscopy
may be compromised by upper airway oedema due to burns and
resuscitation. Securing the airway by tape or ties may not be possible
with facial burns; suturing or even wiring the tube may be necessary.
• Use lung- protective ventilation: ventilation requirements will be high
due to the high metabolic rate. hypercapnia may have to be tolerated.
• Significant improvements in blood loss and patient comfort are achieved
with surgical infiltration of tumescent solution containing adrenaline and
La (e.g. bupivacaine) into the tissues being debrided and used as donor
sites. Care should be taken to not exceed toxic La doses, although
large doses of adrenaline can be infiltrated. reduction in vasopressor
requirements and lactic acidosis may be seen.
• temperature control: a large exposed body surface area will lose heat
rapidly by radiation and evaporation. Measure core temperature and
use all methods available for heat conservation. this should include
active warming of fluids, use of an hMe filter, underpatient warmer,
forced air warmer and attention to minimising patient exposure.
Ongoing discussion with the operating team can ensure that only
areas currently being operated on remain exposed; other areas can be
covered with sterile insulation (e.g. Gamgee tissue). Little body surface
area may be available for warming blankets; however, these should be
utilised. the ambient temperature in the operating theatre will often


---

## 頁面 687

666
666 Chapter 24 Plastic and burns surgery
need to be kept at a temperature that is uncomfortable for staff (above
30°C is common). If patient core temperature is being maintained,
reducing operating room temperature first will be well received.
• Monitoring: pragmatism towards patient monitoring is required; not
all monitoring usually essential for large procedures may be possible.
placement of non- invasive monitoring devices may be difficult. an
arterial line facilitates measurement of Bp and blood sampling. a
central venous line is valuable to provide reliable venous access for this
and future procedures, and helps in the management of intravascular
volume. a urinary catheter is essential.
• access: maintain strict asepsis during line insertion. Cannulae may need
to be stitched. try to place through intact skin. this may not always
be possible; discuss with the surgical team for other options. Good
sites for vascular access may be in short supply and these should only
be used when absolutely necessary. Lines may be easily dislodged.
attentiveness by the anaesthetist may avert unplanned removal of lines
by the surgical team.
• Suxamethonium is contraindicated, except in the first 48h following
burn. Massive K+ release may cause cardiac arrest. nDMr dosing and
frequency requirements are i, due to hypermetabolism, i protein
binding to α- 1 acid glycoprotein and alterations in acetylcholine
receptors at the neuromuscular junction.
• postoperative care: return to the burns unit. Large body surface area
burns (e.g. >40%) or those with additional injury (e.g. smoke inhalation)
may need continued ventilation on ICU until warm and stable.
• analgesia is best provided by IV opioids. requirements can be
substantial. Suggest early intervention of the acute pain team. Good
pain management is important to enable early mobilisation, which is
critical to minimise contracture formation and maintain function.
• Dressing changes can often be facilitated humanely on the ward with
experienced nursing staff. anaesthetic support may be required to
provide sedation and analgesia. entonox® or ketamine/ midazolam
sedation are useful, but occasionally further agents are required.
Consideration should be given to the limitations of providing care in a
remote environment.
• antibiotics and early nutrition are important to increase survival.
nGt or nasojejunal tube are often required to provide or supplement
nutrition.
Chronic burns surgery
patients often require ongoing surgery for many years after initial recovery
from an acute burn. this is usually for scar revision and contracture release.
these patients can present with unique challenges, depending on the se-
verity and location of their initial injury and how they have healed:
• airway: scarring following face and neck burns can result in significant
limitations in mouth opening and neck movement, which will not
improve after Ga and paralysis. Laryngoscopy may be impossible. aFOI
must be considered. an LMa may be a useful rescue device, even in an
anatomically challenging airway. previous airway management should be
reviewed, but progression of scarring may render this obsolete.


---

## 頁面 688

SKIn GraFtInG anD BUrnS reCOnStr UCtIVe SUrGery 667
• access: scarring over conventional venous and arterial access sites
makes cannulation difficult. If it is away from the surgical field, these are
often still viable with ultrasound.
• positioning: contractures may prevent conventional positioning on
the operating table. Careful attention to padding pressure areas and
supporting the limbs and head will reduce risk of further injury.
• psychological: patients have often had a prolonged and traumatic stay in
hospital following their initial injury, with multiple trips to the operating
theatre. post- traumatic stress disorder is common. ask for their input
on what has worked well previously, and offer a premed.
• pain: can be significant and poorly tolerated in this patient group.
Consider regional anaesthesia to supplement Ga if a block will cover
the surgical site. have a low threshold for involving the acute pain team.
• early mobilisation and engagement with the multidisciplinary team
remain critical for scar management, and effective analgesia will allow
this.
Further reading
Bittner ea, Shank e, Woodson L, Martyn JaJ (2015). acute and perioperative care of the burn-
injured patient. Anaesthesiology, 122, 448– 64.


---

## 頁面 689

668


---
