## 頁面 690

Chapter 25 669
Gastrointestinal surgery
Matt Rucklidge and Peter Garnett
Major GI surgery 670
Open GI surgery 672
Summary of open GI procedures 672
Laparoscopic GI surgery 674
Summary of laparoscopic GI procedures 678
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy 680
Laparoscopic appendicectomy 681
Inguinal hernia repair 682
Anal and perianal procedures 683

## 頁面 691

670
670 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Major GI surgery
General considerations
Major abdominal surgery generates a neuroendocrine, metabolic and in-
flammatory response which may result in adverse physiological changes,
including pulmonary dysfunction, i cardiac demand, pain, nausea and
vomiting. this may result in delayed mobilisation, prolonged hospital stays
and i morbidity and mortality. principles of prehabilitation and erAS
should be applied (see % pp. 44–6). Major GI surgery may be performed by
open and minimally invasive (laparoscopic and robotic) techniques.
Preoperative preparation
• history, examination, eCG if indicated, FBC, U&e. Other blood tests,
as indicated by patient comorbidities.
• Assessment of exercise function (e.g. Cpet; see % pp. 33–5). Optimise
cardiac and respiratory function.
• Optimise nutrition. patients with inflammatory bowel disease may be
significantly malnourished and immunosuppressed.
• Discuss multimodal analgesia. Key components for GI surgery include:
abdominal wall blocks and catheters (see % p. 1168), wound catheters,
IV lidocaine infusions (see % p. 1171) and neuraxial blocks (see %
pp. 1114–17).
• Withhold ACe inhibitors/ ArBs 24h before surgery. the VISION study
found reduced risk of mortality, CVe and myocardial injury if withheld.1
• Consider premedication with h antagonist or ppI if at risk of
2
regurgitation, and discuss rSI if indicated.
• Determine whether postoperative hDU/ ICU care is indicated and
ensure a bed is booked before surgery.
• Balance the health of the patient with the complexity and duration of
the surgical procedure, and consider the additional information invasive
monitoring will provide against the risks involved in placement and
interpretation (table 25.1).
• Minimise the period of fasting. Continue clear fluids until 2h prior to
surgery and administer oral carbohydrate preload (caution in diabetic
patients).
Perioperative
• Large- bore IV access, with long extension if access to arms restricted.
Arms are commonly placed by the sides in laparoscopic colorectal
surgery, limiting access intraoperatively.
• perform neuraxial block for postoperative analgesia if indicated, e.g.
spinal with long- acting opioid (e.g. diamorphine or morphine) or low
thoracic epidural.
• Institute invasive monitoring as indicated.
• Consider appropriate line placement for postoperative parenteral
feeding. this may be required in patients undergoing procedures for
inflammatory bowel disease.
• rSI if evidence of bowel obstruction or risk of regurgitation.
• prophylactic antibiotics before skin incision.
• Consider the need for perioperative steroid supplementation. Steroid
therapy is common in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

## 頁面 692

MAjOr GI SUrGery 671
• Avoid prolonged exposure during preparation for surgery, and establish
active patient warming as soon as possible (fluid warmer, hot-a ir
blanket, warming mattress). Monitor central temperature and aim for
normothermia.
• Avoid hypotension. there are strong associations between
intraoperative hypotension and adverse outcomes, including myocardial
injury and death. Maintaining systolic Bp >100mmhg may reduce risk.2
• pONV is common after GI surgery. reduce risk by adequate hydration,
multimodal analgesia to avoid or limit opioids and administration of
different classes of antiemetic.
• procedures may be prolonged; pay special attention to protecting
pressure areas.
• Be prepared for lithotomy or the Lloyd- Davies position (see
% pp. 436–7) and a need for steep trendelenburg (head- down) that
may impair CVS and respiratory function.
• Use a moderately liberal (1– 2L positive) or goal- directed approach
to fluid management. A restrictive fluid regimen is not associated with
improved disability- free survival, compared to a liberal regimen, but is
associated with a higher rate of AKI.3
Postoperative
• Aim for the patient to drink, eat and mobilise in the immediate
postoperative period.
• prescribe overnight O, and continue as required, to maintain SpO
2 2
>95%. Supplemental O should be prescribed if using an opioid- based
2
analgesic technique.
• treat nausea and vomiting aggressively.
• Monitor fluid balance closely. Consider ongoing losses from abdominal
drains, ileostomy and NG aspirate. Measure urine output hourly for at
least 24h following major surgery.
• Arrange a CXr if CVp line sited.
• Continue epidural or abdominal wall catheter LA administration if sited.
• prescribe regular simple analgesia, e.g. paracetamol and NSAIDs
if not contraindicated. Be aware that enteral absorption may be
impaired in some patients after abdominal surgery. Other agents,
including clonidine, gabapentinoids and ketamine, may be beneficial and
reduce postoperative opioid use and opioid side effects, including gut
dysfunction.
• refer to acute pain team for postoperative review.
• Worsening postoperative pain may indicate a complication of surgery.
• Consider daily FBC/ U&e until return of normal bowel function.
Table 25.1 Suggested indications for additional monitoring
Minimally invasive Major abdominal surgery with potential fluid shifts, CVS
CO monitoring compromise, likely requirement for perioperative inotropes
Arterial line CVS, respiratory compromise, major blood loss, need for
blood gas sampling
CVp line Need for vasopressors and/ or inotropes. requirement for
postoperative parenteral nutrition

## 頁面 693

672
672 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Open GI surgery
Despite the increasing range and complexity of abdominal procedures
performed laparoscopically, open techniques remain common and are
listed on % p. 672. Open GI surgery is associated with i pain and tissue
trauma, and may impair postoperative respiratory and GI function, com-
pared with minimally invasive surgical techniques. Some open abdominal
procedures may require the patient to be turned prone intraoperatively
(e.g. abdominoperineal resection).
Summary of open GI procedures
(See table 25.2.)
Table 25.2 General surgical open procedures
Operation Time Position Blood Notes and analgesia
(h) loss (L)
Gastrectomy: 2– 3 Supine 0.5– 1 Consider neuraxial
resection of the analgesia (epidural or
stomach spinal); consider CVp
and arterial line
Pancreatectomy: 3– 6 Supine 0.5– 2 Often long and
resection of the complex surgery
pancreas Consider
Commonly performed neuraxial analgesia
as part of a Whipple (epidural or
procedure (pancreat- spinal); consider
icoduodenectomy) CVp and arterial
line
Cholecystectomy: 1 Supine 0.5 right upper quadrant
resection of the gall incision. transversus
bladder abdominis plane
(tAp) block or wound
catheter ± pCA
Appendicectomy: 1 Supine Min right lower quadrant
resection of the incision; consider tAp
appendix block ± pCA
Right hemicolectomy: 1– 3 Supine 0.5– 1 Consider neuraxial
resection of the right analgesia (epidural
colon or spinal) or rectus
sheath catheters ±
pCA
Left hemicolectomy: 1– 3 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider neuraxial
resection of the left analgesia (epidural
colon or spinal) or rectus
sheath catheters ±
pCA

## 頁面 694

OpeN GI SUrGery 673
Operation Time Position Blood Notes and analgesia
(h) loss (L)
Anterior resection: 2– 3 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1.5 Consider neuraxial
resection of the rectum analgesia (epidural
or spinal) or rectus
sheath catheters ±
pCA
Abdominoperineal 2– 4 Lloyd Davies. 0.5– 2 Consider neuraxial
resection: possible analgesia (epidural
resection of the rectum transition or spinal) or rectus
and anus to prone sheath catheters ±
intraopera- pCA
tively
Hartmann’s procedure: 1– 3 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider neuraxial
resection of the analgesia (epidural
sigmoid colon with or spinal) or rectus
colostomy sheath catheters ±
pCA
Reversal of Hartmann’s: 1– 2 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1.5 Consider neuraxial
Laparotomy with bowel analgesia (epidural
ends reanastomosed or spinal) or rectus
sheath catheters ±
pCA
Closure of loop 0.5– 1 Supine Min Minor procedure but
colostomy or loop generally requires
ileostomy: muscle relaxation.
reversal of ileostomy rarely may convert to
via stoma site laparotomy. May need
abdominal wall block
± pCA

## 頁面 695

674
674 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Laparoscopic GI surgery
Laparoscopic surgery is well established for an increasing range and com-
plexity of elective and emergency procedures. the principles of laparo-
scopic surgery can also be applied to robotically assisted GI procedures.
Laparoscopic and robotic techniques can both be considered minim-
ally invasive surgery. Minimally invasive surgery may have significant
intraoperative effects on cardiopulmonary physiology because of the ef-
fects of the pneumoperitoneum and patient positioning (see table 25.3).
however, benefits of laparoscopy over laparotomy include:
• reduced tissue trauma, wound size and postoperative pain
• Improved postoperative respiratory function
• reduced postoperative ileus
• earlier mobilisation, shorter hospital stays
• Improved cosmetic results.
Surgical requirements
• Creation of a pneumoperitoneum by insufflation of gas (usually CO)
2
into the peritoneal cavity.
• CO is non- combustible, colourless, non- toxic and highly soluble, and
2
is continuously insufflated into the abdomen to maintain a pressure of
10– 20mmhg.
• Devices that warm and humidify CO for laparoscopic abdominal
2
procedures are in use, but their effect on clinical outcomes is unclear.
• Adequate NMB is required in laparoscopy to optimise operating
conditions and limit intra- abdominal pressure.
• Muscle relaxation is essential while docked in robotic surgery to avoid
unexpected patient movement and injury.
Patient positioning
• patient position will be determined by the type of surgery (see %
p. 678).
• patients placed head- down are at greater risk of pulmonary impairment,
including reduction in FrC, V/ Q mismatch and atelectasis. there is an
i risk of endobronchial intubation due to cephalad movement of the
lungs exacerbated by the pneumoperitoneum.
• Long periods positioned steeply head- down can result in facial,
airway and cerebral oedema. this must be considered when planning
extubation.
• regurgitation of gastric contents in the head- down position can result in
conjunctival chemical injury. ensure eyes are protected.
• patients placed head- up are at i risk of reduced Bp and CO due to d
venous return. those most at risk include the hypovolaemic patient, the
elderly and patients with pre- existing CVS disease.
• patients are at risk of injury from slipping in both head-u p and head-
down positions. Consider use of specialised poisoning devices, e.g. non-
slip padding, shoulder supports.

## 頁面 696

LApArOSCOpIC GI SUrGery 675
Effects of gas insufflation
• the physiological effects of pneumoperitoneum are summarised in
table 25.3.
• Stretching of the peritoneum may cause vagal stimulation, resulting
in bradycardia and occasionally asystole. treat with vagolytics, e.g.
atropine, glycopyrronium, and ensure the surgeon ceases insufflation
and releases the pneumoperitoneum.
• Gas insufflation may result in sympathetic response, leading to
hypertension and tachycardia.
• CO is readily absorbed from the peritoneum and may cause
2
hypercapnia and acidosis.
• extraperitoneal gas insufflation may occur through a misplaced trocar
or insufflation needle, via an anatomical defect (e.g. between the pleura
and the peritoneum) or when gas under pressure within the abdomen
dissects through tissue planes. this may result in SC emphysema,
pneumomediastinum, pneumopericardium or pneumothorax.
• Venous gas embolism may rarely occur when gas is inadvertently
insufflated directly into a blood vessel. physiological effects are less with
CO than air due to its greater plasma solubility; however, a significant
2
embolism may be fatal.
Table 25.3 physiological effects of pneumoperitoneum
Respiratory CVS
Airway pressure i Venous return d
FrC d SVr i
pulmonary compliance d CO n d
V/ Q mismatch i risk of arrhythmias i
Neurological GI
ICp n i risk of regurgitation i
Cpp n i
Trauma associated with abdominal access
• Accessing the abdominal cavity by trocar or insufflation (Veress
needle) may cause damage to organs (e.g. spleen, bladder, liver, bowel,
stomach). Organ damage may not always be apparent at the time of
injury.
• Damage to blood vessels may result in massive haemorrhage,
necessitating rapid conversion to an open procedure.

## 頁面 697

676
676 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Preoperative
• Contraindications to laparoscopic surgery are relative; risks are i with
IhD, valvular heart disease, i ICp and hypovolaemia.
• All patients must be considered at risk of conversion to an open
procedure, and a plan for analgesia considered.
• Laparoscopic procedures are increasingly performed in obese patients
due to improved postoperative recovery when compared to an open
procedure. however, the deleterious effects of the pneumoperitoneum
and positioning may be exaggerated in this patient group.
Perioperative
• GA with endotracheal intubation, muscle relaxation and controlled
ventilation is considered the safest technique, as it protects against
pulmonary aspiration and enables control of paCO.
2
• Avoid gastric distension during bag– mask ventilation which may increase
the risk of gastric injury during trocar insertion. Consider inserting a
gastric tube if laparoscopic entry via the left upper abdomen (palmer’s
point) is planned.
• A urinary catheter may be required in lower abdominal procedures to
decompress the bladder and reduce the risk of injury.
• Systemic absorption of CO and raised intra- abdominal pressure will
2
require i minute volume and result in higher intrathoracic pressure.
• Aim for normocapnia, but beware of adverse effects of high
intrathoracic pressure. Controlling etCO during prolonged
2
procedures, especially in the obese and head-d own position, can
be difficult and may occasionally necessitate intermittent release of
intraperitoneal gas or tolerance of a degree of hypercapnia.
• If high inspiratory pressures are encountered, exclude endobronchial
intubation and inadequate NMB. Consider a change to pressure-
controlled ventilation and a reduced I:e ratio (e.g. 1:1).
• Analgesia requirement is dictated by the procedure (see % p. 678).
pain may be intense intraoperatively, but postoperative pain is generally
much less than for open procedures. perioperative IV lidocaine infusion
may reduce postoperative pain and bowel dysfunction following
laparoscopic surgery.
• Avoid hypovolaemia as this exaggerates the deleterious CVS effects of
laparoscopy.
• Laparoscopic surgery is associated with a high incidence of nausea
and vomiting. Administer prophylactic antiemetics and prescribe
postoperatively.
• Invasive arterial Bp and CVp monitoring may be required for extensive
procedures or for patients with CVS or respiratory compromise.
Causes of hypoxia
• hypoventilation: inadequate ventilation due to pneumoperitoneum and
head- down positioning.
• reduced CO: IVC compression, arrhythmias, haemorrhage, myocardial
depression, venous gas embolism, extraperitoneal gas.
• V/ Q mismatch: reduced FrC, atelectasis, endobronchial intubation,
venous gas embolism, pulmonary aspiration and rarely pneumothorax.

## 頁面 698

LApArOSCOpIC GI SUrGery 677
Postoperative
• At the end of the procedure, encourage the surgeon to expel as much
intraperitoneal gas as possible to reduce postoperative pain.
• LA infiltration of port sites and intraperitoneal administration of LA may
reduce postoperative analgesia requirements.
• pain varies and is often worst in the first few hours. Shoulder tip pain
due to diaphragmatic irritation may be troublesome but is usually short-
lived. Significant pain extending beyond the 1st day raises the possibility
of intra- abdominal complications.
Special considerations
• An SGA may be used for some laparoscopic procedures. this should
be avoided if the patient has a history of reflux or obesity and the
procedure is anticipated to be difficult or prolonged, especially in the
head- down position.
• regional anaesthesia is not generally used as the sole anaesthetic
technique because of the high level of block required to cover the
pneumoperitoneum.

## 頁面 699

678
678 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Summary of laparoscopic GI procedures
(See table 25.4.)
Table 25.4 General surgical laparoscopic procedures
Operation Time Position Blood Notes and
(h) loss (L) analgesia
Gastrectomy: 2– 3 Lloyd- Davies 0.5 Consider CVp
resection of the with head up and arterial line
stomach
Pancreatectomy: 4– 8 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Often long and
resection of the with head up complex surgery
pancreas Consider CVp
Commonly performed and arterial line
as part of a Whipple Consider
procedure (pancreatico- neuraxial
duodenectomy) analgesia
Up to 20%
risk of open
conversion
Cholecystectomy: 1 Supine with Min Consider gastric
resection of the gall head up and tube to deflate
bladder left tilt stomach for
port insertion
Appendicectomy: 1 Supine with Min Consider tAp
resection of the head down block
appendix and left tilt
Right hemicolectomy: 1– 3 Supine with 0.5– 1 Consider
resection of the right variable head neuraxial
colon up/ down analgesia or
and left/ right pCA
tilt during
procedure
Left hemicolectomy: 1– 3 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider
resection of the left with variable neuraxial
colon head up/ analgesia or
down and left/ pCA
right tilt during
procedure
Anterior resection: 2– 4 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider
resection of the rectum with variable neuraxial
head up/ analgesia. Be
down and left/ aware of time
right tilt during spent in extreme
procedure positioning

## 頁面 700

SUMMAry OF LApArOSCOpIC GI prOCeDUreS 679
Operation Time Position Blood Notes and
(h) loss (L) analgesia
AP resection: 3– 5 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider
resection of the rectum with variable neuraxial
and anus head up/ analgesia. Be
down and left/ aware of time
right tilt during spent in extreme
procedure positioning
possible
transition to
prone intra-
operatively
Hartmann’s procedure: 1– 3 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider
resection of the sigmoid with variable neuraxial
colon with colostomy head up/ analgesia or
down and left/ pCA. Be aware
right tilt during of time spent
procedure in extreme
positioning
Reversal of Hartmann’s: 1– 2 Lloyd- Davies 0.5– 1 Consider
removal of end- with variable neuraxial
colostomy with bowel head up/ analgesia or
ends reanastomosed down and left/ pCA. Significant
right tilt during chance of
procedure conversion to
laparotomy

## 頁面 701

680
680 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
procedure Laparoscopic removal of gall bladder
time 40– 80min
pain ++
position Supine, 15– 20° head- up, slight left tilt
Blood loss Not significant
practical techniques GA, ett, IppV
Preoperative
• patients are classically, though not always, ‘♀, forty, fair, fat and fertile’.
• Gallstone- associated pancreatitis may make surgery more difficult and
increase the risk of conversion to an open procedure.
• With appropriate patient selection and perioperative techniques, the
procedure can be performed as a day case.
Perioperative
• Avoid gastric distension during bag– mask ventilation which may increase
the risk of gastric injury during trocar insertion. Consider inserting a
gastric tube prior to abdominal access.
• ensure adequate IV access; haemodynamic changes may be profound
and there is potential for sudden blood loss.
• the combination of pneumoperitoneum and obesity may make
ventilation difficult.
• high risk for pONV. Administer prophylactic antiemetics.
• Short- acting opioids (alfentanil or fentanyl) may counter the
haemodynamic fluctuations and limit postoperative opioid-r elated side
effects.
• Ask the surgeon to infiltrate the port sites with LA.
• About 5% of cases require conversion to an open procedure.
Postoperative
• prescribe regular simple analgesics, opioid as required (prN), antiemetic
and IV fluids until tolerating oral fluids.
Special considerations
• this can be a very stimulating procedure, particularly during diathermy
around the liver.
• LA applied to the gall bladder bed may reduce postoperative analgesic
requirements (e.g. 20mL of 0.25% bupivacaine).
• If conversion to open cholecystectomy, pain can be significant and
a pCA may be required. LA should be infiltrated by surgeons, and a
wound catheter or a subcostal tAp block may be beneficial.

## 頁面 702

LApArOSCOpIC AppeNDICeCt OMy 681
Laparoscopic appendicectomy
procedure resection of appendix
time 20– 40min
pain ++
position Supine
Blood loss Not significant
practical techniques rSI, ett, IppV, tAp block
Preoperative
• patients are often young and fit unless appendix ruptured, in which case
they may be septic and unwell.
• In the unwell patient, resuscitate preoperatively and administer timely
antibiotics.
• Conversion to open appendicectomy is more likely if the appendix is
ruptured.
• Occasionally presents in the elderly. May be the presenting condition of
caecal adenocarcinoma requiring subsequent right hemicolectomy.
Perioperative
• prophylactic antibiotics.
• rSI. patients may be unfasted or at risk of aspiration due to delayed
stomach emptying 2° to intra-a bdominal pathology.
• Consider NSAID and paracetamol IV.
• encourage the surgeon to infiltrate LA or perform a right-s ided
tAp block.
• extubate awake (consider left lateral position).
Postoperative
• prescribe regular simple analgesics and opioid prN, antiemetics and IV
fluids until tolerating oral fluids.

## 頁面 703

682
682 ChApter 25 Gastrointestinal surgery
Inguinal hernia repair
procedure repair of inguinal muscular canal defect through
which bowel may protrude
time 30– 60min
pain ++
position Supine
Blood loss Not significant
practical techniques GA, SV, SGA, inguinal field block. Spinal. Local
infiltration and/ or sedation
Preoperative
• patients are usually older adult ♂ or young children.
• Can usually be performed as a day case procedure.
Perioperative
• Inguinal LA field block may be used as a sole technique for surgery or to
complement GA.
• the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves are easily blocked, 2cm caudal
and medial to the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS).
• the genitofemoral nerve is located 1–2 cm above the midpoint of the
inguinal ligament, deep to the aponeurosis of the external oblique. this
may be left to the surgeon to block, reducing the risk of vascular or
peritoneal puncture.
Special considerations
• Inguinal hernia repair may be performed laparoscopically.
• patients who are unfit and/ or elderly may benefit from hernia repair
under LA. however, some hernias may prove difficult to repair
under LA and a spinal anaesthetic or GA may be preferable to avoid
intraoperative GA conversion. Confirm with the surgeon the suitability
for LA repair.
• A low- dose propofol infusion may be a useful adjunct in cases
performed under LA.
• Other hernia repairs are commonly performed. It is important to
establish the type of hernia repair and anaesthetic requirements. An
incisional hernia repair may vary from a minor repair of a laparoscopic
port site hernia to a complex repair of a large anterior abdominal wall
defect.

## 頁面 704

ANAL AND perIANAL prOCeDUreS 683
Anal and perianal procedures
procedure haemorrhoidectomy, fissure, sphincter repair,
perianal abscess, pilonidal sinus
time 20– 30min
pain +++
position Supine, lithotomy, head-d own, occasionally
prone
Blood loss Not significant
practical techniques GA, SV, SGA. Spinal (‘saddle block’)
Preoperative
• Assess suitability for SGA/ lithotomy/ head- down position.
• Consider ett if the patient is obese or at risk of aspiration.
Perioperative
• Often intensely stimulating procedures, and laryngospasm is common.
Maintain deep anaesthesia and consider short- acting opioids (fentanyl or
alfentanil) and/ or NO.
2
• potential for bradycardia or asystole due to increase in vagal tone.
Anticipate and have vagolytic to hand.
• LA infiltration by the surgeon during the procedure often provides
effective pain relief.
Postoperative
• Avoid pr route of drug administration.
• prescribe regular simple analgesics and opioid prN.
• Consider aperients for discharge, particularly if opioids used.
Special considerations
• Surgery for pilonidal sinus may require prone positioning. Confirm with
surgeon preoperatively and prepare patient accordingly.
• Avoid spinal anaesthesia followed by immediate head-d own tilt.
• A sacral- only spinal block (‘saddle block’) using heavy bupivacaine is a
useful alternative, with little effect on CVS dynamics.
References
1 roshanov pS, rochwerg B, patel A, et al. (2017). Withholding versus continuing angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers before noncardiac surgery: an
analysis of the vascular events in noncardiac surgery patients cohort evaluation prospective co-
hort. Anesthesiology, 126, 16– 27.
2 Sessler D, Bloomstone jA, Aronson S, et al. (2019). perioperative quality initiative consensus
statement on intraoperative blood pressure, risk and outcomes for elective surgery. Br J Anaesth,
122, 563– 74.
3 Myles pS, Bellomo r, Corcoran t, et al. (2018). restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major
abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med, 378, 2263– 74.

## 頁面 705

684
