## 頁面 706

Chapter 26 685
Bariatric surgery
Nicholas Kennedy and Katherine Reeve
Introduction 686
Indications for surgery 687
Risk scoring in bariatric surgery 688
Intragastric balloon insertion/ removal 689
Gastric banding 690
Gastric bypass 692
Sleeve gastrectomy 694

## 頁面 707

686
686 ChapteR 26 Bariatric surgery
Introduction
Bariatric surgery describes a variety of procedures that are performed on
people with obesity. Weight loss is achieved by reducing the size of the
stomach with gastric banding, removal of part of the stomach or rerouting
part of the small intestine.
When anaesthetising patients for bariatric surgery, perioperative factors
discussed in % Chapter 2 should be considered.
Bariatric surgery should occur in a multidisciplinary team setting with
rigorous preoperative assessment, intraoperative pathways and consider-
ation for postoperative location and management.

## 頁面 708

IndICatIonS foR SuRGeR y 687
Indications for surgery
NICE guidelines 2014
Bariatric surgery is a treatment option for people with obesity if all of the
following criteria are fulfilled:1
• they have a BMI of ≥40kg/m 2 or between 35kg/ m2 and 40kg/ m2 and
other significant disease (e.g. type 2 diabetes or high Bp) that could be
improved if they lose weight.
• all appropriate non-s urgical measures have been tried, but the
person has not achieved or maintained adequate, clinically beneficial
weight loss.
• the person has been receiving or will receive intensive management in a
tier 3 service.
• the person is generally fit for anaesthesia and surgery.
• the person commits to the need for long-t erm follow- up.
In addition, in 2014, nICe brought out specific points relating to bariatric
surgery for people with recent- onset type 2 diabetes:
• offer an expedited assessment for bariatric surgery to people with a
BMI of ≥35kg/ m2 who have recent- onset type 2 diabetes, as long as
they are also receiving or will receive assessment in a tier 3 service (or
equivalent).
• assessment for bariatric surgery should be considered in people with a
BMI of 30– 34.9kg/ m2 and/ or people of asian family origin at a lower
BMI who have recent-o nset type 2 diabetes.
References
1 national Institute for health and Care excellence (2014). Obesity: identification, assessment and
management. Clinical guideline [CG189]. M http:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ cg189

## 頁面 709

688
688 ChapteR 26 Bariatric surgery
Risk scoring in bariatric surgery
the obesity Surgery Mortality Risk Score (oS- MRS) is a validated scoring
system for risk stratification in bariatric surgery, and it aims to aid informed
consent discussions, guide surgical decision- making and allow standardisa-
tion of outcome comparisons between treatment centres (table 26.1).2
Table 26.1 obesity Surgery Mortality Risk Score
Risk factor Points
age >45y 1
hypertension 1
♂ sex 1
Risk factors for pe* 1
BMI ≥50kg/ m2 1
total:
Risk group (score) Postoperative mortality risk (death/ total number
of patients)
Class a (0 or 1 points) 0.2%
Class B (2 or 3 points) 1.1%
Class C (4 or 5 points) 2.4%
* previous Vte, pulmonary hypertension, preoperative vena cava filter or hypoventilation due
to obesity.
Reprinted from Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases, 3(2), deMaria eJ et al. obesity surgery
mortality risk score: proposal for a clinically useful score to predict mortality risk in patients
undergoing gastric bypass, 134– 40, Copyright (2007), with permission from american Society for
Bariatric Surgery. published by elsevier Inc.
References
2 demaria eJ, Murr M, Byrne tK, et al. (2007). Validation of the obesity Surgery Mortality Risk
Score in a multicenter study proves it stratifies mortality risk in patients undergoing gastric bypass
for morbid obesity. Ann Surg, 246, 578– 82.

## 頁面 710

IntRaGaStRIC Balloon InSeR tIon/ReMoVal 689
Intragastric balloon insertion/r emoval
procedure placement of 700ml silicone balloon into stomach via
gastroscope which is inflated with 700ml of 0.9% sodium
chloride dyed with methylthioninium chloride (methylene
blue). Balloons are removed after 6– 12mo via gastroscopy
time 15– 30min
pain none
position left lateral or sitting up
Blood loss none
practical IV sedation, topical anaesthesia or Ga, ett
techniques
Preoperative
Intragastric balloons are typically inserted in:
• patients with BMI 25– 35kg/ m2 as a weight loss adjunct in those who do
not qualify for bariatric surgery. these patients are usually very low risk.
• Very high- BMI patients often >60– 70kg/ m2, usually with many
significant comorbidities, in whom invasive surgical procedures are
deemed too risky.
Perioperative
• topical anaesthesia is possible in cooperative patients.
• low-r isk patients are usually suitable for IV sedation, and often an
anaesthetist is not required. left lateral position is usual for insertion of
the balloon. Balloon removal can be done in a similar fashion.
• IV sedation may be poorly tolerated and risky in high-r isk patients
due to hypoventilation, hypoxia and airway obstruction. a Ga with
intubation and ventilation may be indicated.
• Very large patients tolerate lying on their side very poorly and are
better dealt with sitting up.
Special considerations
• Intragastric balloon insertion is associated with considerable
nausea immediately postoperatively. antiemetics should be given
perioperatively and prescribed for the patient to take home. there is
no nausea associated with balloon removal.
• Balloon removal can sometimes be surgically tricky and may take longer.
• Both insertion and removal of balloons can usually be done as day case
procedures, even in high- risk patients.

## 頁面 711

690
690 ChapteR 26 Bariatric surgery
Gastric banding
procedure placement of silicone adjustable band around the top of
the stomach to create a small pouch above it. a small in-
jection port is placed SC and connected to the band with
tubing to allow the band to be inflated with 0.9% sodium
chloride to control passage of food past it
time 45– 90min
pain +
position Supine, head- up
Blood loss Minimal
practical Ga, ett, IppV (with peep)
techniques
Preoperative
• Gastric banding is a relatively straightforward laparoscopic procedure
with a very low mortality rate.
• Gastric banding is commonly used for the lower- BMI and lower- risk
bariatric surgical patients. however, some centres use gastric banding
for most of their cases and some patients choose banding, so some
very high- BMI and high- risk patients present.
• preoperative analgesia with paracetamol is recommended.
Perioperative
• ensure equipment (e.g. operating table, hover mattress) appropriate for
weight and adequate staff numbers are available.
• Insert two IV cannulae.
• take extreme care in positioning the patient to avoid damage due to
pressure or overhanging tissue.
• take precautions to ensure the patient does not slide down the table
when head- up.
• Standard perioperative monitoring. use forearm Bp cuff if upper arm
too large or wrong shape to place a cuff.
• preoxygenate fully in head-u p position.
• Intubation and ventilation are mandatory. use V appropriate for IBW
T
or lean body mass.
• face mask ventilation can be difficult. expect rapid desaturation during
apnoea, and have a plan for airway management. RSI is not mandatory.
• use short-a cting anaesthetic agents such as sevoflurane. tIVa with
propofol is a good technique, but correct dosing may be difficult.
• Good nMB is important.
• antiemetics are important immediately postoperatively to prevent
strain on the band sutures. Give two drugs perioperatively.
• opioid analgesia is usually required postoperatively; usually fentanyl or
morphine. limit intraoperative opioid and titrate dosage upwards in
recovery.
• patients should be woken up and extubated sitting up. plan for an
electric bed.
• ensure the surgeon infiltrates all port sites with la.

## 頁面 712

GaStRIC BandInG 691
Postoperative
• ensure patients are nursed sitting up in recovery.
• titrate opioids in recovery.
• Most patients can be safely managed without hdu, but this should be
considered for patients with significant oSa.
• encourage early mobilisation.
• thromboprophylaxis as per local protocol.

## 頁面 713

692
692 ChapteR 26 Bariatric surgery
Gastric bypass
procedure Roux- en- y gastric bypass. almost always laparoscopic
time 90– 200min
pain ++
position Supine, head- up
Blood loss >500ml, occasionally more due to ooze from splenic
injury or stomach. G&S required
practical Ga, ett, IppV (with peep)
techniques
Preoperative
• Gastric bypass involves a small bowel anastomosis, formation of a
Roux limb, creation of a gastric pouch and a gastrojejunal anastomosis.
Surgical techniques differ, and it is important to establish in what order
the surgeon will do the procedure.
• Many surgeons ask for a large (typically 34fr) bougie (or large nGt
or dilator) to be passed orogastrically by the anaesthetist during
pouch formation. this identifies the pouch and prevents stapling of
the oesophagus. the bougie is then pushed distally into the Roux limb
during gastrojejunal anastomosis to allow suturing around it. there are
other techniques involving circular staplers, so ensure you understand
what is used, how it works and when it is needed. discuss with the
surgeon preoperatively.
Perioperative
• antiemetics immediately postoperatively to prevent strain on the
anastomosis. two agents are recommended perioperatively.
Postoperative
• postoperative Cpap is quite safe. no evidence of damage to the gastric
anastomosis.
Special considerations
• Sometimes surgeons ask for an nGt to be inserted to decompress the
stomach prior to pouch formation. If so, insert it orogastrically, and
remove as soon as the stomach is decompressed. leaving an nGt in
situ runs the risk of stapling it into the pouch, an avoidable disaster.
• Many surgeons test the gastrojejunal anastomosis for leaks by asking
for an oGt to be passed into the pouch after the anastomosis is
complete. leak testing is achieved either by injecting air down the
oGt and observing for bubbles in the fluid that has been added via
the laparoscope, or by injecting 760ml of dilute methylthioninium
chloride (methylene blue) into the pouch. leaks are usually obvious to
see. Beware of the dyed fluid refluxing back into the mouth. Inserting a
sucker into the mouth during this procedure helps prevent the dye from
either being aspirated or refluxing out and onto the patient’s face and
hair! Consider cricoid pressure during this procedure.

## 頁面 714

GaStRIC BypaSS 693
• postoperative complications to watch for:
• anastomotic leak: tachycardia (postoperative tachycardia is a leak
until proven otherwise), excessive pain, pain on drinking.
• In the event of a suspected leak, the best investigation is usually to
relaparoscope the patient as soon as possible.
• Bleeding: signs of severe bleeding similar to any other procedure.
Staple line bleeding can present as melaena or haematemesis in the
first 24h. unless the patient is shocked, conservative management is
warranted.

## 頁面 715

694
694 ChapteR 26 Bariatric surgery
Sleeve gastrectomy
procedure Stomach divided by stapling to reduce it to about 25%
of its original size. a large portion of the stomach along
the greater curvature is removed through a small inci-
sion. the result is a sleeve or tube- like structure. almost
always laparoscopic
time 90– 150min
pain ++
position Supine, head- up
Blood loss >500ml, occasionally more due to ooze from stomach
staple line. G&S required
practical Ga, ett, IppV (with peep)
techniques
Preoperative
• Sleeve gastrectomy is becoming increasingly common as the weight loss
procedure of choice.
• often performed in high-r isk patients, instead of a gastric bypass, as it is
an easier and quicker procedure.
• Some surgeons ask for a large (typically 34fr) bougie (or large nGt
or dilator) to be passed orogastrically by the anaesthetist during the
procedure. this allows the surgeon to staple alongside the bougie,
identify the anatomy and prevent stapling of the oesophagus. ensure
you understand what is used, how it works and when it is needed.
discuss with the surgeon preoperatively.
Perioperative
• antiemetics immediately postoperatively to prevent strain on the
anastomosis. two agents are recommended perioperatively.
• avoid hypotension after stomach stapling. this helps identify staple line
bleeding, reducing the risk of postoperative bleeding.
Postoperative
• postoperative Cpap is safe.
Special considerations
• as per gastric bypass.
