## 頁面 716

Chapter 27 695
Liver procedures
Alwyn Kotze and Nilmini Manawaduge
Anaesthetic management of acute oesophageal bleeding 696
Anaesthesia for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
procedure 698
Liver transplantation 699
Hepatic resection 704

## 頁面 717

696
696 CHApter 27 Liver procedures
Anaesthetic management of acute
oesophageal bleeding
Acute variceal haemorrhage is a medical emergency. Overall mortality
in upper GI bleeding is 2– 10%.1 Anaesthetists will usually be involved if
patients at risk of dying.
Treatment
effective resuscitation and definitive therapy should be instituted simul-
taneously. Subsequent management targets normalisation of physiological
parameters, alongside strategies to prevent rebleeding.2
Resuscitation
• rapid assessment of Airway, Breathing and Circulation status.
• Supplementary O prN.
2
• early airway control if indicated. Balance risk of airway loss against
haemodynamic consequences of rSI.
• Insert large- bore IV cannulae × 2; consider CVp and arterial line.
• Use crystalloids for initial fluid resuscitation. No rCts of fluid
management in this situation, but balance essential between avoiding
hypotension and avoiding exacerbation of bleeding.
• IV tranexamic acid reduces mortality and should be used early.3
• Urgent FBC, coagulation, point-o f- care coagulation testing, U&e,
LFts, eCG.
• Urinary catheter if unstable.
• Keep nil by mouth.
Transfusion management
• Manage exsanguinating bleeding using massive haemorrhage protocol.4
• prBCs: follow a restrictive strategy—t ransfuse if bleeding and
haemodynamically unstable or if Hb <70– 80g/ L.
• FFp and/ or cryoprecipitate indicated in patients with haemodynamic
instability and coagulopathy (INr >1.5 times normal or fibrinogen level
<1.5g/ L, respectively).
• platelets are indicated in patients who are actively bleeding and
haemodynamically unstable, and have platelet count <50 × 109/ L.
• In patients on warfarin with active bleeding, reverse with pCC.
Stopping the bleeding
Medical management, along with endoscopic interventions:
• Stop NSAIDs.
• Consider stopping antiplatelet agents— discuss with appropriate
specialty.
• pharmacological therapy (terlipressin, somatostatin or somatostatin
analogues), e.g. terlipressin 1– 2mg IV 6- hourly (reduce if high risk
for CAD).
• prophylactic antibiotic therapy for 48h.
• No role for acid suppression drugs (e.g. H blockers, ppIs) before
2
endoscopy.
• endoscopy alongside resuscitation if haemodynamically unstable,
otherwise within 24h of bleeding. Band ligation or sclerosant injection
will be used for variceal haemorrhage and adrenaline may be injected
around ulcers.

## 頁面 718

ANAeStHetIC MANAGeMeNt OF ACUte OeSOpHAGeAL BLeeDING 697
Salvage interventions
• Interventional radiology may be indicated for patients who rebleed after
endoscopic treatment if appropriate expertise is available. tIpSS is the
treatment of choice.
• Balloon tamponade with an oesophageal and gastric balloon should be
used only where endoscopic and drug treatments have failed. there is
a high risk of fatal complications (aspiration, oesophageal tear/r upture
and airway obstruction) and therefore, this should be used only in
HDU/ ICU.
Stabilisation and prevention of rebleeding
• Consider ICU/ HDU admission in situations described above or
according to usual physiological criteria.
• prophylactic β- blockade (propranolol 40– 160mg bd) reduces portal
pressure and decreases rebleed rate from 70% to 50%.

## 頁面 719

698
698 CHApter 27 Liver procedures
Anaesthesia for transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt procedure
• tIpSS: percutaneous creation of a vascular connection between portal
and systemic circulations, reducing portal venous pressure.5,6
• Indicated in treatment of portal hypertension and its complications
(refractory variceal bleeding and diuretic- resistant ascites).
• A stent is placed radiologically between the hepatic and portal veins,
allowing blood to bypass dilated oesophageal and gastric veins.
• May be elective (for ascites) or emergent (variceal bleeding).
• Anaesthesia requires good IV access and invasive arterial line monitoring
to aid cardiovascular stability. Inotropes, vasopressors and blood
components should be easily available.
Preoperative considerations
• Assess the hepatic functional impairment, haemodynamic stability, risk
of aspiration, presence of heart failure and encephalopathy.7
• tIpSS is contraindicated if there is severe pulmonary hypertension,
severe tricuspid regurgitation or severe heart failure.
Conduct of anaesthesia
• Usually undertaken in an angiography suite; hence, all anaesthetic issues
related to remote- site anaesthesia apply.
• prophylactic broad-s pectrum antibiotics should be administered before
the procedure and should be continued for 24h.
• Conscious sedation or GA are acceptable; if the patient is at high risk, it
is safer to give GA with rSI and ett.
• either inhalational agents or tIVA technique using short-a cting hypnotic
agents, muscle relaxants and opioids are appropriate in order to ensure
rapid post- procedure recovery.
• the internal jugular vein is cannulated to access the hepatic vein via
a sheath. A cutting- edged catheter is introduced through the liver
parenchyma into a branch of the portal vein under fluoroscopy with
contrast. the tract is dilated and a metallic stent is placed.
• Intraoperative complications can include those related to accessing the
internal jugular vein (or femoral, if this route is used). procedure- specific
complications include massive bleeding due to inadvertent hepatic
artery puncture or hepatic capsular tear.
• tIpSS may precipitate acute cardiac failure, as the shunt leads to an i
venous return and preload. post- procedural worsening of jaundice or
encephalopathy may be seen in 20% of patients and 20% fail to control
variceal bleeding, even after the procedure.8
• post- procedure sepsis is possible.
• patients are managed either in critical care or on gastroenterology/
hepatology wards according to unit criteria (conscious level,
haemodynamics, etc.).
• evidence suggesting that early tIpSS in variceal bleeding improves
outcome requires further study.9,10,11

## 頁面 720

LIVer trANSpLANtAtION 699
Liver transplantation
procedure transplantation of entire liver
time 4– 10h
pain Variable, but less than other comparable procedures (e.g.
gastrectomy, thoracotomy). pCA; avoid NSAIDs
position Supine, one or both arms out
Blood loss extremely variable. 0– 10 000mL, X- match 6 units and con-
sider need for thawing other components before surgery.
Cell salvage and point-o f- care coagulation management
vital. Use donated blood and components as necessary
practical ett, IppV
techniques
Introduction
the majority of patients who present for liver transplantation have end-
stage liver disease. the commonest indication worldwide is post- hepatitis
C cirrhosis,12 but alcohol- related cirrhosis and hepatic cancers are the com-
monest aetiologies in the UK.13 Other conditions requiring transplantation
include: 1° sclerosing cholangitis, viral hepatitis (B, C), polycystic liver dis-
ease, 1° biliary cirrhosis and metabolic liver disease.
transplants are performed semi-e lectively as graft availability is the rate-
limiting step. patients with end- stage liver disease are ranked in order of
priority according to a pre- agreed allocation system, then matched to the
1st suitable organ based on considerations including compatibility and graft
size. A minority with fulminant or subacute liver failure are listed ‘super-
urgently’ and receive priority over end-s tage liver disease patients. In the
UK, offers are allocated nationally based on the United Kingdom model for
end- Stage Liver Disease (UKeLD) and transplant Benefit Score (tBS) that
considers both risk of death without, and life expectancy gained after liver
transplantation.14
Liver transplantation is performed under GA guided by invasive moni-
toring, with resuscitation facilities (including fluid and donated and/o r sal-
vaged blood components) and vasoactive drugs being readily available. Key
anaesthetic objectives are to maintain normal systemic physiology and to
stabilise vital organ function (including graft function) despite unique chal-
lenges at different surgical stages.
Preoperative
potential recipients are assessed by a multidisciplinary team, including,
as a minimum, a hepatologist, a transplant surgeon and an anaesthetist.
Opinions are sought from others as required (intensivist, dietitian, psych-
ologist, physiotherapist, substance misuse specialist and medical specialties)
before listing. Individual decisions are made based on regularly updated na-
tional selection policies and risk scoring systems (e.g. UKeLD/ tBS in the
UK or MeLD in the US).15,16 preoperative assessment includes investigation/
treatment of the following.

## 頁面 721

700
700 CHApter 27 Liver procedures
Issues related to the liver disease
• Jaundice, hyponatraemia, ascites, pleural effusions, renal failure 2° to
liver disease (hepatorenal syndrome), hepatopulmonary syndrome,
portopulmonary syndromes (associated severe portal and pulmonary
hypertension, leading to rV failure and potential cardiac arrest
intraoperatively), coagulopathy (prolonged pt, low platelet count,
fibrinolysis), varices (oesophageal, gastric, rectal, abdominal wall),
hepatic encephalopathy, systemic vasodilation with hypotension and
cardiac failure and poor nutritional state.
• Haemodynamic instability can result from cardiac consequences of the
underlying pathology (e.g. alcoholic cardiomyopathy), from pericardial
effusions and from circulatory failure due to vasodilation and low SVr.
Anaemia resulting in low plasma viscosity further reduces effective
tissue perfusion.
Comorbidity
• Smoking, DM (a common comorbidity with hepatitis C), IHD, pre-
existing renal impairment of other aetiology.
Screening investigations
• As for any major abdominal surgery (FBC, U&e, clotting, eCG, CXr).
Detailed abdominal imaging as requested by the surgeon. resting
echocardiography and spirometry.
Evaluation of physiological reserve is essential
• History and bedside assessment of frailty (e.g. Liver Frailty Index)
for all patients. Cpet and/o r pharmacological/ myoview stress
echocardiography for specific indications.
• preoperative fluids are not routinely administered, except in patients
with renal impairment and hyperacute liver failure (glucose-b ased
solutions).
Perioperative
• Venous ± arterial access before induction.
• Anaesthesia: intubate the trachea. Gastric emptying often delayed in
end- stage liver disease; consider the need for rSI. Vasopressors may be
required.
• establish arterial, central venous and wide-b ore access if not done
preinduction. CO monitoring is often necessary to guide fluid and
vasopressor administration. pulse contour analysis or tOe are used and
in patients with suspected pulmonary hypertension, pA catheterisation
is considered.
• Broad- spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis, large- bore NGt and core
temperature monitoring. Forced air warming.
• Ventilate to normocapnia, using O- enriched air and volatile agent
2
(isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane). establish infusion of an opioid
agent (alfentanil, remifentanil, fentanyl). paralysis is maintained with
either intermittent boluses or infusions.
• patients undergoing transplantation for fulminant liver failure are at risk
of raised ICp. Controversy exists whether volatile agents worsen ICp,
even where hypercapnia is avoided. Measures to reduce intracranial
hypertension are advisable.
Surgical techniques vary but share common features.

## 頁面 722

LIVer trANSpLANtAtION 701
Pre- anhepatic/ dissection phase
Bilateral subcostal (‘Mercedes’)/ reverse L subcostal incision. the liver,
porta hepatis and surrounding structures are exposed, its anatomy de-
fined and slings placed around the major vessels. Haemorrhage from dis-
section, varices and pre- existing coagulopathy is common. Most bleeding
is venous and can be limited by judicious maintenance of low CVp, as for
liver resection.
Anhepatic phase
portal and hepatic veins divided. explantation of native liver and IVC prep-
aration for implantation. New liver inserted. Caval and portal anastomoses
fashioned. two main techniques are used for hepatectomy and implantation
of the donor liver (Fig. 27.1):
• Cava- cavostomy: division of the hepatic veins with caval preservation,
followed by a ‘piggy back’ implant where the new liver, with its own
attached vena cava, is anastomosed cava- to- cava with the recipient’s
IVC either side- to- side or end-t o- side. Surgery is usually performed
with the native vena cava side- clamped, so that venous return is
relatively preserved.
• Classical technique: liver explant with its included portion of the IVC.
Anastomosis of the donor vena cava above and below the liver (‘caval
replacement’). Now less popular as it requires caval cross-c lamping
with reduced venous return and consequent refractory hypotension.
Venovenous bypass is employed in some centres to facilitate venous
return (femoral vein to right internal jugular or brachiocephalic vein).
Venovenous bypass uses heparin- bonded extracorporeal circuitry;
systemic anticoagulation is unnecessary.
• Anastomosis fashioned between donor and recipient portal vein.
• While anhepatic, patients with acute liver failure may become
profoundly hypoglycaemic. this is less common in end-s tage liver
disease.
• Hypocalcaemia, lactic acidosis, coagulopathy and hypoglycaemia
progressively occur during the anhepatic phase. regular monitoring and
prompt treatment are essential.
Fig. 27.1 (a) Classical technique; (b) ‘piggy back’ technique of orthotopic liver
transplantation. this image was published in BJA Education, 17(1), Kashimutt S, Kotze, A.
Anaesthesia for liver transplantation, 35– 40, Copyright © the Author 2016.

## 頁面 723

702
702 CHApter 27 Liver procedures
Neohepatic stage
Graft reperfusion, hepatic artery anastomosis and biliary reconstruction.
Reperfusion phase
• Begins with the re- establishment of blood flow through the liver
(portal vein to vena cava). reperfusion syndrome occurs, with
cytokines release, complement activation and transient reduction
in core temperature. Immediately after reperfusion, there is a rapid
elevation in plasma K+, as it is washed out of the previously ischaemic
graft along with other products of hepatocyte breakdown. At the
start of reperfusion, a bolus dose of 10mmol calcium chloride helps
protect against the cardiac effects of sudden K+ flux. Arrhythmias
are common and cardiac arrest occasionally occurs. profound
hypotension is common unless the circulation is actively supported with
appropriate fluid and vasoactive drug therapy (e.g. noradrenaline up
to 2 micrograms/ kg/ min, adrenaline 10 micrograms or phenylephrine
boluses of 500 micrograms to 1mg aliquots). As graft hepatocyte
function returns, electrolyte gradients are restored. Hypotension
at this stage results from myocardial depression and subsequently
vasodilation. Myocardial depression usually resolves within 2 or 3min,
but vasodilation may persist for several hours. In severely ill patients, an
infusion of noradrenaline may subsequently be required. Some centres
use a prophylactic vasopressin analogue, such as terlipressin, before
reperfusion.
• the haemodynamic and biochemical mayhem of reperfusion resolves
rapidly if the graft is functioning. persisting acidosis or hypocalcaemia are
suggestive of graft 1° non- function, which represents a transplantation
emergency. this may necessitate urgent retransplantation. early
promising signs of graft function include a rise in body temperature
due to i metabolism, hyperglycaemia from enhanced gluconeogenesis,
normalisation of coagulopathy, bile production and lactate clearance.
Coagulopathy is managed with haemostatic agents (tranexamic acid/
protamine) and blood or blood product transfusion guided by pOCt
(teG®/ rOteM®/ point- of- care INr/ ABG).
• Following reperfusion, the hepatic artery is reanastomosed, and finally
the bile duct reconstructed by direct duct- to- duct anastomosis/roux-
en-Y loop.
• Other considerations:
• Induction immunosuppression (e.g. methylprednisolone 0.5–1 g) is
administered before graft reperfusion in some centres.
• K+ and Ca2+ should be monitored regularly during surgery and
supplemented, when required, to maintain normal values. Some
centres use Ca2+ infusion (3– 5mmol/ h) from the dissection phase.
• there is no proven strategy for avoiding renal failure, other than
optimising fluid balance and avoiding nephrotoxins. In patients at
particularly high risk, avoidance of nephrotoxic immunosuppressants
(such as ciclosporin, tacrolimus) in the early postoperative period
may have a role.

## 頁面 724

LIVer trANSpLANtAtION 703
Postoperative
• patients should be managed in ICU. early extubation is often feasible
and further facilitates improvement of early graft blood flow due to
negative intrathoracic pressure during SV, reduced ICU stay and d
incidence of nosocomial infections.
• Analgesia: pCA/ epidural/ paravertebral blocks have all been described.
However, regional techniques are discouraged in many centres because
of coagulopathy, instead relying more on regular systemic analgesics
(opioid pCA, paracetamol) and occasionally wound catheters. Avoid
NSAIDs (interaction with calcineurin inhibitors to induce renal failure).
• postoperative fluids: maintenance fluid/ NG feed at 1.5mL/ kg/ h.
• Bleeding postoperatively is relatively uncommon.
• Graft 1° non-f unction/ initial poor function due to vascular issues
(hepatic artery thrombosis, portal vein thrombosis) or the graft itself
occurs in up to 5– 10% of cases,17 requiring retransplantation.
• Other postoperative problems include sepsis, AKI and acute rejection.
these are managed medically with good results.
• Immunosuppression is usually started with standard triple therapy
(steroid/ mycophenolate/ tacrolimus) and then tailored to the individual,
guided by unit policy. Other drugs in current use include basiliximab,
ciclosporin, azathioprine and sirolimus.
• Long- term results of liver transplantation are continually improving.
One- year survival figures in major centres now run between 85% and
97% (risk-a djusted),13 with a good long- term quality of life.

## 頁面 725

704
704 CHApter 27 Liver procedures
Hepatic resection
procedure resection of liver tissue
time 2– 6h
pain As for transplantation. epidural more common
position Supine, arms out, reverse trendelenburg position
Blood loss Minimal to 900mL, X- match 5– 10 units
practical techniques ett, IppV
the major indication for hepatic resection is metastatic colorectal adeno-
carcinoma, for which it improves 5y survival by 30%, compared to no
intervention.18 Other indications are benign and malignant 1° hepatobiliary
tumours, donor hepatectomy for liver transplantation and occasionally liver
trauma. the principles underlying anaesthesia are similar to those for any
patient undergoing a major laparotomy.
• Major liver resection usually involves removal of 30– 75% of functional
hepatic tissue. remaining hepatocytes function poorly for some days;
short- acting drugs should be used.
• Increasingly, surgeons are using minimally invasive techniques.
• Laparoscopic liver resection decreases intraoperative bleeding,
transfusion requirements and postoperative ascites.19 It presents
different anaesthetic challenges due to pneumoperitoneum, with
consequent haemodynamic instability.
• Drugs that might compound postoperative hepatic encephalopathy
or which rely on hepatic metabolism should be avoided, e.g.
benzodiazepines.
• Most resections are accomplished with minimal blood loss, but
catastrophic haemorrhage may occur.
• resection commences with perihepatic dissection and identification of
vascular anatomy.
• Intraoperative diagnostic ultrasound is often used to pinpoint lesions
requiring resection.
• Bleeding occurs from either vascular inflow (portal vein, hepatic artery)
or venous back bleeding. Branches of the hepatic artery and portal vein
to the segment of the liver to be resected have usually been ligated,
so inflow bleeding should not be a major problem. In practice, the line
of resection often passes through a watershed area between vital and
devitalised tissue. Maintaining a low CVp reduces venous back bleeding
(often difficult in laparoscopic resections). remaining inflow bleeding
may require intermittent portal vein cross- clamping (the ‘pringle
manoeuvre’). this results in a degree of ischaemia– reperfusion injury
to the remaining liver tissue, and potentially poor postoperative liver
function. this can be minimised by intermittent (rather than continuous)
clamping. A brief period of vascular occlusion followed by reperfusion
before sustained ischaemia (‘preconditioning’) may be beneficial.

## 頁面 726

HepAtIC reSeCtION 705
• resection of tumours located in critical sites of the liver and very
radical liver resections are now possible. the liver is totally excised
and dissected ex vivo/e x situ following perfusion with an ice- cold
preservation solution. Healthy parts of the liver are then attached
to the vena cava and reimplanted. this is a prolonged and difficult
procedure and anaesthetically similar to a liver transplant. Venovenous
bypass is sometimes required.20
Preoperative
• Most patients are otherwise relatively fit unless they have parenchymal
liver disease.
• those who have undergone neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy are at
higher risk as it can deplete functional cardiorespiratory reserves.
• the degree of planned resection plays a major role in modifying the
anaesthetic technique as well as monitoring due to risk of bleeding and
postoperative liver failure.18
• preoperative assessment should thus be tailored. Apart from routine
investigations for any major surgery, particular attention should be
paid to liver function (including coagulation), Child– pugh scoring and
cardiorespiratory function.
Perioperative
• Large- bore venous access. Arterial line. CVp monitoring may be used,
depending on bleeding risk and predicted need for vasoactive therapy.
Active warming.
• regular monitoring of blood glucose is essential as there is a risk of
hypoglycaemia.
• thoracic epidural analgesia is utilised to good effect postoperatively,
though there is controversy (but little data) on the risks posed by
postoperative coagulopathy.21 Alternatives are intrathecal opioids, pCA
and wound catheters (or a combination).
• Aim to preserve hepatic blood flow, thus minimising liver injury.
Intubation and IppV with a volatile agent are the commonest way of
achieving this.
• Isoflurane and sevoflurane may enhance ischaemic preconditioning and
help preserve hepatic function where the pringle manoeuvre is used.
Fluid and haemodynamic management
• Maintaining a low CVp (<5cmHO) substantially reduces bleeding. this
2
approach has dramatically reduced transfusion requirements, with no
reported adverse consequences, despite the theoretically i risk of
an air embolus. A higher CVp target may be necessary to reduce the
risk of renal ischaemia in patients at risk or in those with poor cardiac
reserve.
• techniques to lower the venous pressure include pre-resection
fluid restriction, epidural boluses, head-u p tilt and nitrate or diuretic
infusions.
• Surgical manipulation of the liver can cause significant reductions in
venous return with hypotension. Close communication between the
anaesthetist and the surgeon is essential.

## 頁面 727

706
706 CHApter 27 Liver procedures
• early tranexamic acid decreases transfusion requirements.
• Blood components are required in massive haemorrhage or prolonged
hepatic inflow obstruction or where very little hepatic tissue remains.
point- of- care coagulation testing allows rational treatment. However,
intraoperative coagulopathy is relatively uncommon.
• peak disturbances in clotting are seen on postoperative d2–3 .
Postoperative
• patients who have undergone >50% resection should initially be
managed in an HDU for monitoring of liver function and to manage
pain with either epidural or pCA.
• postoperative liver insufficiency: coagulopathy or encephalopathy may
develop in those who have undergone very major resections. this has
practical implications for the timing of removal of epidural catheters,
etc. which may require FFp cover.
• postoperative renal dysfunction, hypoglycaemia, sepsis and intra-
abdominal infections occur more commonly in extensive resections or
high- risk patients.
• the overall results of radical hepatic resection are very encouraging,
with many cases treated that were previously considered inoperable.
Many remain disease- free 5y following resection. In those cases where
recurrences arise, further hepatic resection is often possible.

## 頁面 728

HepAtIC reSeCtION 707
References
1 Stanley AJ, Laine L (2019). Management of acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding. BMJ, 364, l536.
2 National Institute for Health and Care excellence (2012). Acute upper gastrointes-
tinal bleeding overview. [NICe pathway] M http:// pathways.nice.org.uk/ pathways/
acute- upper- gastrointestinal- bleeding
3 Bennett C, Klingenberg S, Langholz e, et al. (2014). tranexamic acid for upper gastrointes-
tinal bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 11, CD006640. M https:// www.cochrane.org/
CD006640/ UpperGI_ tranexamic- acid- an- agent- that- promotes- blood- clotting- for- serious- or-
uncontrolled- upper- gastrointestinal- bleeding
4 Vadera S, Yong CWK, Gluud LL, et al. (2019). Band ligation versus no intervention for primary
prevention of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in adults with cirrhosis and oesophageal varices.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 6, CD012673.
5 Chana A, James M, Veale p (2016). Anaesthesia for transjugular intrahepatic porto systemic shunt
insertion. BJA Educ, 16, 405– 9.
6 DeGasperi A, Corti A, Corso r, et al. (2009). transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
(tIpS): the anesthesiological point of view after 150 procedures managed under total intravenous
anesthesia. J Clin Monit Comput, 23, 341– 6.
7 pivalizza eG, Gottschalk LI, Cohen A, et al. (1996). Anesthesia for transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt placement. Anesthesiology, 85, 946.
8 Duncan IC (2004). the transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (tIpSS) procedure— a re-
view. SA J Radiol, 8, 4– 8.
9 Afdhal NH, Curry Mp (2010). early tIpS to improve survival in acute variceal bleeding. N Engl J
Med, 362, 2421– 2.
10 rajoriya N, tripathi D (2014). Historical overview and review of current day treatment in the
management of acute variceal haemorrhage. World J Gastroenterol, 20, 6481– 94.
11 García- pagán JC, Caca K, Bureau C, et al. (2010). early use of tIpSS in patients with cirrhosis and
variceal bleeding. N Engl J Med, 362, 2370– 9.
12 NHS Blood and transplant (2012). Guideline for referral for liver transplant assessment. M http://
odt.nhs.uk/ pdf/ advisory_ group_ papers/ LAG/ referral_ for_ transplantation.pdf
13 NHS Blood and transplant (2019). Annual report on liver transplantation. Report for 2018/2 019
(1 April 2009– 31 March 2019). M https:// nhsbtdbe.blob.core.windows.net/ umbraco- assets-
corp/ 16782/ nhsbt-l iver- transplantation- annual- report- 2018- 19.pdf
14 trotter JF (2017). Liver transplantation around the world. Curr Opin Organ Transplant, 22, 123– 7.
15 Kashimutt S, Kotze A (2017). Anaesthesia for liver transplantation. BJA Educ, 17, 35– 40.
16 Deshpande r, Chadha rM (2018). Anaesthesia for orthotopic liver transplantation.
Anaesthesia tutorial of the Week 377. M https:// resources.wfsahq.org/ atotw/
anaesthesia- for- orthotopic- liver- transplantation/
17 pretto eA, Biancofiore G, DeWolf A, et al. (2015). Oxford Textbook of Transplant Anaesthesia and
Critical Care. Oxford: Oxford University press.
18 Hartog A, Mills G (2009). Anaesthesia for hepatic resection surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care
Pain, 9, 1– 5.
19 egger Me, Gottumukkala V, Wilks JA, et al. (2017). Anesthetic and operative considerations for
laparoscopic liver resection. Surgery, 161, 1191– 202.
20 Cheng F, Yang Z, Zeng CJ, et al. (2018). Anaesthetic management of modified ex vivo liver resec-
tion and autotransplantation. Ann Transplant, 23, 274– 84.
21 Kelliher L, Jones C, Dickinson M, et al. (2013). epidural anaesthesia and analgesia for liver resec-
tion. Anaesthesia, 68, 975– 6.

## 頁面 729

708
