## 頁面 730

Chapter 28 709
Endocrine surgery
Pete Ford and Peter Valentine
Thyroidectomy 710
Parathyroidectomy 714
Phaeochromocytoma 716
Carcinoid tumours 720

## 頁面 731

701
710 ChaPTer 28 Endocrine surgery
Thyroidectomy
Procedure removal of all or part of the thyroid gland
Time 1– 2h, depending on complexity
Pain +/ ++
Position Shoulder bolster and head ring. head- up tilt
Blood loss Usually minimal. Potentially major if retro-
sternal extension
Practical techniques IPPV + reinforced eTT
General considerations
(See also % pp. 223–5.)
• Complexity can vary from removal of a thyroid nodule to removal of a
long- standing retrosternal goitre to relieve tracheal compression.
• retrosternal goitre is usually excised through a standard incision, but
occasionally a sternotomy is required.
• recurrent laryngeal nerves and parathyroid glands may be damaged or
removed.
• Straightforward unilateral surgery can be performed under superficial
and deep cervical plexus block, but Ga is usual (see % p. 1118).
Preoperative
• ensure that the patient is as near euthyroid as possible (see %
pp. 223–5).
• Check for complications associated with hyperthyroidism: aF,
tachycardia, proptosis.
• acute preparation of thyrotoxic patients involves iodine and
glucocorticoid— both inhibit the conversion of T4 to T3 and narrow the
window (7– 10d) for surgery, necessitating joint management with the
surgeon and endocrinologist.
• Check biopsy histology for malignancy.
• ask about duration of goitre. Long- standing compression of the trachea
may be associated with tracheomalacia.
• ask about positional breathlessness. assess the airway.
• examine the neck. how big is the goitre? Consistency: malignant goitres
are hard. Can you feel below the gland (retrosternal spread)? Is there
evidence of tracheal deviation (check the radiograph)?
• Look for signs of SVC obstruction: distended neck veins that do not
vary with the respiratory cycle.
• Listen for stridor.
• Check the range of neck movements preoperatively, and do not extend
them outside of their normal range during surgery.
• Preoperative paracetamol/N SaIDs (PO or Pr) help postoperative pain
control.
Investigations
• FBC, U&e, Ca2+ and thyroid function tests are routine.
• Chest radiograph. Check for tracheal deviation and narrowing. Thoracic
inlet views may be necessary if retrosternal extension is suspected,

## 頁面 732

ThyrOIDeCTOmy 711
and to detect tracheal compression in the anterior–p osterior plane
(retrosternal enlargement may be asymptomatic).
• CT scan accurately delineates the site and degree of airway
encroachment or intraluminal spread. advisable if there are symptoms
of narrowing (e.g. stridor, positional breathlessness) or >50% narrowing
on the radiograph. Plain radiographs overestimate diameters, due to
magnification effects, and cannot be relied on when predicting eTT
diameter and length. Furthermore, a CT scan will help assess the degree
of retrosternal extension.
• eNT consultation to document cord function for medicolegal
purposes is not routine in all units, unless an abnormality is likely, e.g.
previous surgery and malignancy. Pre- existing cord dysfunction may
be asymptomatic. Fibreoptic examination also defines any possible
laryngeal displacement (useful in airway planning). Look for photographs
or diagrams in notes.
Airway planning
• The majority of cases are straightforward, even when there is some
tracheal deviation or compression. a reinforced eTT will negotiate
most distorted tracheas and permit optimal head positioning. Tracheal
compression by a benign goitre will often accommodate an eTT
beyond the predicted size, as the gland is soft. Preoxygenation should
be followed by IV induction and a neuromuscular- blocking drug (after
checking that the lungs can be inflated manually).
• The following features should lead to a more considered approach and
may require discussion with the surgeon and radiologist:
• Malignancy. Cord palsies are likely. Distortion and rigidity of
surrounding structures. Possibility of intraluminal spread. The larynx
may be displaced. The tumour can produce obstruction anywhere
from the glottis to the carina.
• Significant respiratory symptoms or >50% narrowing on chest
radiograph or lateral thoracic inlet view.
• Coexisting predictors of difficult intubation.
Options to secure the airway for complicated thyroid
surgery
• Teamwork between the anaesthetist and the surgeon is the key to
successful and safe airway management.
• Inhalational induction with sevoflurane in patients with stridor and a
suspected difficult upper airway. Stridor and d minute ventilation delay
the onset of sufficiently deep anaesthesia for intubation. Topical La may
be useful.
• Fibreoptic intubation (see % pp. 393–6). attempts to pass a fibreoptic
bronchoscope in an awake patient with stridor are difficult, as the
narrowed airway may become obstructed by the instrument. may be
useful where there is marked displacement of the larynx or coexisting
difficulties with intubation, e.g. ankylosing spondylitis.
• an SGA may be difficult to place in patients with laryngeal displacement.

## 頁面 733

721
712 ChaPTer 28 Endocrine surgery
• Tracheostomy under La. This will only be possible if the tracheostomy
can be easily performed below the level of obstruction.
• Ventilation through a rigid bronchoscope is a backup option when
attempts to pass an eTT fail. The surgeon and necessary equipment
should be immediately available for complex cases, particularly those
involving significant mid- to lower tracheal narrowing.
• ‘Plan C’ of the difficult airway algorithm (perform a cricothyroid
puncture) may not be an option.
Perioperative
• eye padding, lubrication and tape are important, especially if the patient
has exophthalmos.
• Tracheal manipulation during surgery can be very stimulating. Full
relaxation or use of remifentanil should be used to prevent coughing
during surgery.
• electrophysiological monitoring of the recurrent laryngeal nerves is now
common intraoperatively, using specialised reinforced eTTs with emG
capability. Neuromuscular- blocking drugs should therefore be avoided
during maintenance of anaesthesia.
• Securely fix the eTT with tape, avoiding ties around the neck. access to
check the tube is difficult during the procedure.
• head and neck extension with slight head-u p tilt.
• Consider a superficial cervical plexus block for postoperative analgesia.
Some surgeons infiltrate SC with La and adrenaline before starting. La
at the end can produce spurious nerve palsies (see % p. 1118).
• arms to sides, IV extension.
• Communicate with the surgeon if there are excessive airway pressures
during manipulation of the trachea. Obstruction may be due to airway
manipulation distal to the tube or the bevel of the tube abutting on the
trachea.
• monitor muscle relaxation on the leg.
• In cases of long- standing goitre, some surgeons like to feel the
trachea before closing to assess tracheomalacia. They may ask for
partial withdrawal of the eTT, so that the tip is just proximal to the
operative site.
• at the end of surgery, reverse the muscle relaxant and extubate with
the patient sitting up to reduce venous compression. Use an extubation
technique that minimises coughing to reduce early 2° haemorrhage.
This might include waking up on remifentanil. any respiratory difficulty
should lead to immediate reintubation. The traditional practice of
inspecting the cords immediately following extubation is difficult and
unreliable. Possible cord dysfunction and postoperative tracheomalacia
are better assessed with the patient awake and sitting up in the
recovery room.
Postoperative
• Intermittent opioids with PO/ Pr paracetamol and NSaIDs.
• The opioid requirement is reduced with SC infiltration and superficial
cervical plexus block.
• Use fibreoptic nasendoscopy if there is doubt about recurrent laryngeal
nerve injury.

## 頁面 734

ThyrOIDeCTOmy 713
Postoperative stridor
• Haemorrhage with tense swelling of the neck. remove clips from the
skin, and sutures from the platysma/ strap muscles to remove the clot.
In extremis, this should be done at the bedside. Otherwise return to
theatre without delay. a haematoma will affect lymphatic and venous
drainage of the upper airway, causing laryngeal and pharyngeal oedema.
removing the haematoma will not always restore airway patency
immediately. IV dexamethasone and nebulised adrenaline may help
acutely.
• Tracheomalacia. Long-s tanding large goitres may cause tracheal collapse.
This is a very rare complication. Immediate reintubation, followed by
tracheostomy, may be necessary.
• Bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve palsies. This may present with
respiratory difficulty immediately postoperatively or after a variable
period. Stridor may only occur when the patient becomes agitated.
assess by fibreoptic nasendoscopy. may require tracheostomy.
Other postoperative complications
Hypocalcaemia
• hypocalcaemia from parathyroid removal is rare. Serum Ca2+ should be
checked at 24h, and again daily if low.
• Presentation: may present with signs of neuromuscular excitability,
tingling around the mouth or tetany. may progress to fits or ventricular
arrhythmias.
• Diagnosis: carpopedal spasm (flexed wrists, fingers drawn together)
may be precipitated by cuff inflation (Trousseau’s sign). Tapping over the
facial nerve at the parotid may cause facial twitching (Chvostek’s sign).
Prolonged QT interval on eCG.
• Treatment: serum Ca2+ below 2mmol/ L should be treated urgently with
10mL of 10% calcium gluconate over 3min plus alfacalcidol 1–5 g PO
(calcium gluconate is preferable, as calcium chloride will cause tissue
necrosis if extravasation occurs). Check the level after 4h, and consider
Ca2+ infusion if still low. If hypocalcaemic, but level above 2mmol/L ,
treat with PO Ca2+ supplements (see also % p. 227).
Thyroid crisis
(See % pp. 224–5.)
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is possible if there has been retrosternal dissection.
Further reading
Dempsey Ga, Snell Ja, Coathup r, et al. (2013). anaesthesia for massive retrosternal thyroidectomy
in a tertiary referral centre. Br J Anaesth, 111, 594– 9.
Cook Tm, morgan PJ, hersch Pe (2011). equal and opposite expert opinion. airway obstruction
caused by a retrosternal thyroid mass: management and prospective international expert opinion.
Anaesthesia, 66, 828– 36.
Farling Pa (2000). Thyroid disease. Br J Anaesth, 85, 15– 28.

## 頁面 735

741
714 ChaPTer 28 Endocrine surgery
Parathyroidectomy
Procedure removal of solitary adenoma or four glands for
hyperplasia
Time 1– 3h
Pain +/ ++
Position Shoulder bolster and head ring. head- up tilt
Blood loss Usually minimal
Practical techniques IPPV + eTT
General considerations
(See % p. 226.)
• Usual indication for operation is 1° hyperparathyroidism from
parathyroid adenoma.
• With preoperative localisation, removal of simple adenoma has been
described using sedation and La. Ga is more usual.
• Carcinoma may require en bloc dissection.
• Total parathyroidectomy may also be performed in 2°
hyperparathyroidism associated with CKD.
• hypercalcaemia may produce significant debility, particularly in the
elderly.
Preoperative
Hypercalcaemia is usual. With moderate elevation, ensure adequate hydra-
tion with 0.9% sodium chloride. Levels over 3mmol/ L should be corrected
before surgery, as follows:
• Urinary catheter
• One litre of 0.9% sodium chloride in the 1st hour, then 4–6 L over 24h
• Pamidronate 60mg in 500mL of 0.9% sodium chloride over 4h
• Watch for fluid overload— CVP measurement may be necessary.
monitor electrolytes, including mg2+, phosphate and K+.
Severe hypercalcaemia may occasionally necessitate emergency surgery. It
may cause arrhythmias and may antagonise the effects of NDmrs.
• Preoperative imaging using ultrasound and technetium-9 9m sestamibi
scanning may be used to localise parathyroid adenomas, allowing a
minimal access or targeted approach with a 2cm incision over the
suspected gland.
• 2° hyperparathyroidism occurs 2° to low serum Ca2+ in CKD. In this
situation:
• Total parathyroidectomy may be required. Control afterwards is
easier if no functioning parathyroid tissue is left.
• Dialysis will be required preoperatively.
• The risk of bleeding is i.
• alfacalcidol is usually started preoperatively.
• 1° hyperparathyroidism has been associated with an i risk of death
from CVS disease, hypertension, LVh, valvular and myocardial
calcifications, impaired vascular reactivity, alterations in cardiac
conduction, impaired glucose metabolism and dyslipidaemia. PTh has
serious consequences on cardiac function in renal failure.

## 頁面 736

ParaThyrOIDeCTOmy 715
• a less utilised technique these days is to use methylthioninium chloride
(methylene blue) to highlight the parathyroid glands. most useful in
four- gland hyperplasia; parathyroids are highly vascular and take up
the dye faster than surrounding tissues. If given too early, however, the
effect is lost, as the surrounding tissue colours. The usual dose is 5mg/
kg, diluted in 500mL, given over 1h prior to surgery. Complications
include restlessness, paraesthesiae, burning sensation, chest pain,
dizziness, headache and mental confusion. SpO will not be accurate if
2
the infusion is too fast.
Perioperative
• Similar anaesthetic considerations to thyroid surgery. airway
encroachment is not usually a problem.
• Operation times may be unpredictable, especially if frozen section or
parathyroid assays are performed. Consider active heat conservation.
• Point- of- care PTh assays are available, making intraoperative
measurement of PTh possible in minimally invasive or targeted surgery,
thereby allowing a rapid assessment of success intraoperatively.
• extubation requires a cough- free technique, reducing the incidence of
early 2° haemorrhage.
Postoperative
• Serum Ca2+ checked at 6h and 24h. hypocalcaemia may occur (for
diagnosis and treatment, see % p. 713). Continuation of alfacalcidol
in 2° hyperparathyroidism lessens the chance of hypocalcaemia
postoperatively.
• Perform fibreoptic nasendoscopy if recurrent laryngeal nerve damage is
suspected.
• Pain not usually severe, especially with La infiltration or superficial
cervical plexus blocks. Pr paracetamol is useful. avoid NSaIDs in
patients with poor renal function.
Further reading
mihai r, Farndon Jr (2000). Parathyroid disease and calcium metabolism. Br J Anaesth, 85, 29– 43.

## 頁面 737

761
716 ChaPTer 28 Endocrine surgery
Phaeochromocytoma
Procedure removal of one or two adrenals or extra- adrenal tumour
Time 1– 2h open, possibly longer if laparoscopic
Pain +/ ++ (depending if open or laparoscopic)
Position Lateral or supine for open, lateral for laparoscopic
Blood loss Variable
Practical IPPV + eTT, arterial and CVP lines ± CO monitor
techniques
• Tumours of chromaffin cells secreting noradrenaline (commonest),
adrenaline or dopamine (least common). may secrete >1 amine.
• may secrete other substances, e.g. VIP, aCTh.
• Ninety- nine per cent occur in adrenals; 10% are bilateral; may be
anywhere along the sympathetic chain from the base of the skull to the
pelvis.
• most are benign; a few are malignant.
• Occur in all age groups, less commonly in children.
• Can occur in association with meN2a (medullary thyroid carcinoma,
parathyroid adenomas) and meN2B (medullary thyroid carcinoma and
marfanoid features). Both have abnormalities of the RET oncogene on
chromosome 10.
• also found in patients with neurofibromatosis 1 and von hippel–L indau
syndrome.
Presentation
• hypertension can be constant, intermittent or insignificant.
• association of palpitations, sweating and headache with hypertension
has a high predictive value.
• anxiety, nausea and vomiting, weakness and lethargy are also common
features.
• acute presentations include pulmonary oedema, mI and
cerebrovascular episodes.
• Can present perioperatively. Unless the diagnosis is considered and
appropriate treatment instituted, the mortality rate is high—u p to 50%.
Diagnosis
• Clinical suspicion.
• With i genetic testing of families, more patients are being diagnosed
before they become symptomatic (up to 30% familial).
• Urinary catecholamines or their metabolites (metadrenaline and
normetadrenaline) measured either over 24h or overnight.
• CT radiocontrast may provoke phaeochromocytoma crises, and its use
must be avoided in unblocked patients. modern contrast agents may
be used.
• mIBG (meta- iodobenzylguanidine) scan: a radiolabelled isotope of
iodine taken up by chromaffin tissue.
• mrI.
• Search in the abdomen first, and widen the search if tumour not
located. mIBG is particularly helpful in revealing unusual sites.

## 頁面 738

PhaeOChrOmOCyTOma 717
Investigations relevant to anaesthesia
• echocardiography: patients with a history of ischaemia or signs of heart
failure require cardiac echocardiography. rarely, patients can present
with a catecholamine cardiomyopathy.
• Blood glucose: excess catecholamines result in glycogenolysis and insulin
resistance; some patients become frankly diabetic.
Preoperative
• refer the patient to an experienced team. It is not acceptable to
manage on an occasional basis.
• Usual management is sympathetic blockade with first α- and then
β- blocker, if required, for tachycardia (phenoxybenzamine, a non-
competitive, non- selective α- blocker, and then atenolol/p ropranolol/
metoprolol).
• Phenoxybenzamine causes postural hypotension, lethargy and nasal
congestion.
• Whereas α- blockade is generally considered a necessity, the use of
β- blockade is more controversial and some anaesthetists will actively
avoid them at the time of surgery.
• Preoperative blockade:
• allows safe anaesthesia for removal of the tumour
• Prevents hypertensive response to induction of anaesthesia
• Limits surges in BP seen during tumour handling.
• avoid unopposed β- blockade; there is a theoretical risk of increasing
vasoconstriction and precipitating a crisis. although this has been
reported, many patients will already have received β- blockers for
hypertension before presentation, without adverse effects.
• Prazosin and doxazosin have been used. These are competitive,
selective α1- blockers. They do not inhibit presynaptic noradrenaline
reuptake and thus avoid the tachycardia seen with non-s elective α-
blockade. The literature contains reports both in favour and against the
use of selective blockade.
• Calcium channel blockers (particularly nicardipine) have been used.
They inhibit noradrenaline- mediated Ca2+ influx into smooth muscle but
do not affect catecholamine secretion by the tumour.
• metirosine is an inhibitor of catecholamine synthesis. It is toxic and not
widely used.
• There are no absolute criteria for fitness for surgery.
Assessment of sympathetic blockade
• Patients will often be admitted a few days prior to surgery to observe
BP control and/ or have had outpatient 24h ambulatory BP monitoring.
• aim for BP <140/ 90mmhg, with hr <100bpm.
• erect and supine BP and hr. Should exhibit a marked postural drop
>20mmhg, with compensatory tachycardia.
• The duration of blockade is determined by the practicalities of tumour
localisation and scheduling of surgery.
• Blockade is started to treat symptoms, as well as to prepare for surgery.

## 頁面 739

781
718 ChaPTer 28 Endocrine surgery
Perioperative
• Laparoscopic or open adrenalectomy through a midline, transverse or
flank incision (introduction of gas for laparoscopic resection can result
in hypertension in normal subjects, and this may be exaggerated in
patients with phaeochromocytomas).
• Premedication PrN (e.g. temazepam 20– 30mg).
• monitoring to include direct BP and CVP (triple lumen to allow drug
infusions). Consider CO monitoring in patients with CVS disease and
catecholamine cardiomyopathy.
• Large- bore IV access.
• monitor and maintain temperature, particularly during laparoscopic
resection which can be prolonged.
• Induction: avoid agents that release histamine, and thus catecholamines
(use propofol, alfentanil or remifentanil and vecuronium or
rocuronium).
• hypotension is unlikely at induction and can be treated with either
ephedrine, metaraminol or phenylephrine. Due to preoperative α-
blockade, doses will likely need to be i. rarely, dilute adrenaline may be
required.
• maintenance: if using volatile, use isoflurane or sevoflurane. Desflurane
should be avoided, as it can cause sympathetic nervous system
activation.
• Consider epidural with opioid and La for open procedures
(sympathetic blockade will not prevent catecholamine-i nduced
vasoconstriction); otherwise fentanyl/ alfentanil/ remifentanil until
tumour removal, when morphine (10– 20mg) can be substituted.
• Nicardipine and mg2+ are also useful (block catecholamine release,
block receptors and provide direct vasodilation and possibly myocardial
protection).
• mg2+ is started prior to induction, given as a bolus of 2– 4g, and then
continued at a rate of 1– 2g/ h. It is normal for the patient to feel
nauseated with the mg2+ bolus.
• Surges in BP can occur at induction, with formation of the
pneumoperitoneum and with tumour handling. The fluctuations in
BP tend to be transient, and medication needs to respond in a similar
fashion. hypertension can be treated in a number of ways: intermittent
2g boluses of mg2+, boluses of remifentanil, phentolamine, sodium
nitroprusside or labetalol (if associated with tachycardia).
• Control hr at <100bpm with the β- blocker of choice.
• Once the tumour is resected, BP takes several minutes to decline.
Prevent hypotension by ensuring an adequate preload. maintain a high
CVP of 10– 15mmhg. Several litres of a crystalloid may be needed.
• hypotension following resection can be due to low CO or a low
SVr. Treat the former with low- dose adrenaline, and the latter
with metaraminol or phenylephrine. Vasopressin has been used in
resistant hypotension. Terlipressin 1mg bolus, followed, if required, by
vasopressin, starting at 0.04 units/ min, then titrated to effect.
• It is unusual to require inotropic support by the time the patient is ready
to leave theatre, unless there are coexisting medical problems.

## 頁面 740

PhaeOChrOmOCyTOma 719
Postoperative
• Patient should be nursed in ICU/ hDU for 12h.
• monitor blood glucose. The withdrawal of catecholamine excess can
lead to severe hypoglycaemia.
• If both adrenals are resected, the patient will require steroid support
immediately. hydrocortisone 100mg bolus in theatre, decreasing to
maintenance dose after surgical stress. Fludrocortisone 0.1mg daily may
be commenced with oral intake.
• even when only one adrenal is removed, patients may occasionally be
relatively hypoadrenal and require support. If this is suspected (e.g.
unexpectedly low BP), a small dose of hydrocortisone (50mg) will do
no harm, while the result of cortisol estimation is awaited.
Special considerations
Pregnancy
• There are many reports of the combination of a newly diagnosed
phaeochromocytoma and pregnancy. Overall mortality is up to 17%.
• Phenoxybenzamine and metoprolol are safe.
• If phaeochromocytoma is diagnosed before mid trimester, it should be
resected at this stage.
• There is high mortality associated with normal delivery; consider lower-
segment Caesarean section (LSCS), with or without resection of the
phaeochromocytoma at the same procedure.
Management of an unexpected phaeochromocytoma
• any patient who has unexplained pulmonary oedema, hypertension or
severe unexpected hypotension should prompt consideration of the
diagnosis; however, it can be very difficult. There is no quick available
test to support the diagnosis in the acute situation.
• Once the diagnosis has been considered, if possible, surgery should be
discontinued to allow acute treatment, investigation and blockade prior
to definitive surgery. attempts to remove the tumour during a crisis
may result in significant morbidity, or even mortality.
• Treatment acutely should consist of vasodilators and IV fluid; this
may be counterintuitive in a patient with severe pulmonary oedema.
The circulating volume in patients with phaeochromocytoma may be
markedly reduced, and vasodilation will result in a profound drop in BP.
GTN can usually be successfully titrated in this situation.
• Patients who present with hypotension have an acutely failing heart due
to profound vasoconstriction. These are the most difficult patients in
whom to make the diagnosis and to treat. additional catecholamines in
this situation merely fuel the fire but are difficult to resist. The mortality
rate is very high.
Further reading
Subramaniam r (2011). Phaeochromocytomas— current concepts in diagnosis and management.
Trends Anaesth Crit Care, 1, 104– 10.
James mFm (2010). adrenal medulla: the anaesthetic management of phaeochromocytoma. In:
James mFm (ed). Anaesthesia for Patients with Endocrine Disease. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
pp. 149– 69.
Prys- roberts C (2000). Phaeochromocytoma—r ecent progress in its management. Br J Anaesth,
85, 44– 57.
O’riordan Ja (1997). Pheochromocytomas and anesthesia. Int Anesthesiol Clin, 35, 99– 127.

## 頁面 741

720
720 ChaPTer 28 Endocrine surgery
Carcinoid tumours
Carcinoid tumours are derived from argentaffin cells and produce pep-
tides and amines. They occur in the GI tract (75%), bronchus, pancreas and
gonads. Surgery may be performed to remove the 1° tumour and debulk
liver metastases in carefully selected patients.
Conduct of anaesthesia in patient with carcinoid syndrome
Best managed by centres familiar with the difficulties. major complications
anticipated include profound swings in BP, fluid and electrolyte shifts and
bronchospasm.
• Preoperatively treat symptomatically with antidiarrhoeal agents,
bronchodilators, correction of dehydration/ electrolyte imbalance and
treatment of heart failure.
• Preoperatively, some centres will use continuous infusions of octreotide
50–1 00 micrograms/h our; others give 100 micrograms SC tds. although
schedules vary from weeks (SC) to hours (IVI), both are only of benefit
even if given before surgery to suppress basal amine turnover.
• avoid factors that may trigger carcinoid crises: anxiety and drugs that
release histamine, e.g. morphine.
• Premedication: anxiolytic (benzodiazepine) and octreotide 50–5 00
micrograms SC 1h preoperatively, if not already treated; otherwise
continue with preoperative regime.
• monitoring should include invasive BP preinduction (both induction
and surgical manipulation of the tumour can cause large swings), CVP,
regular blood glucose and blood gases. CO monitoring will guide fluid
therapy and help in managing hormone- induced preload and afterload
variations, particularly if cardiac complications present.
• right heart failure increases hepatic venous congestion which
predisposes to bleeding in liver surgery. Limiting IV fluid initially in these
patients and permitting controlled hypotension may reduce bleeding.
• Consider an epidural. Benefits include a reduced risk of a carcinoid crisis
with d stress response 2° to good analgesia; however, low doses of La
should be used.
• Give octreotide 100 micrograms IV diluted to 10 micrograms/m L,
slowly at induction. Prevent pressor response to intubation.
• Suxamethonium has been used safely for rSI, although fasciculations
may theoretically stimulate hormone release by increasing the intra-
abdominal pressure, so consider rocuronium.
• maintenance: both TIVa and inhalation techniques have been used
successfully.
• Octreotide (10– 20 microgram boluses IV) to treat severe hypotension.
• avoid all histamine- releasing drugs (atracurium, morphine) and
catecholamines (release serotonin and kallikrein, which activate
bradykinins).
• Labetalol, esmolol or ketanserin (5- hT receptor blocker) can be used
2
for hypertension.
• ICU or hDU is required.

## 頁面 742

CarCINOID TUmOUrS 721
• Patients may wake very slowly (thought to be due to serotonin).
• hypotensive episodes may occur, as surgery may have reduced, rather
than eliminated, the tumour, thus requiring further IV boluses of
octreotide (10– 20 micrograms).
• Wean octreotide over 7– 10d following tumour resection.
Further reading
mancuso K, Kaye aD, Boudreaux JP, et al. (2011). Carcinoid syndrome and perioperative anesthetic
considerations. J Clin Anesth, 23, 329– 41.Powell B, al mukhtar a, mills Gh (2011). Carcinoid: the
disease and its implications for anaesthesia. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 11, 9– 13.

## 頁面 743

722
