## 頁面 744

Chapter 29 723
Urological surgery
Mark Catolico
Cystoscopic procedures 724
Transurethral resection of the prostate 728
Transurethral resection of bladder tumour 731
Open simple prostatectomy and radical prostatectomy 732
Nephrectomy and partial nephrectomy 733
Radical cystectomy 735
Robot- assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy 737
Percutaneous stone removal 739
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy 740
Testicular surgery 741
Jeremy Campbell
Renal transplant 742
See also
% Circumcision/hypospadias repair p. 941
% Orchidopexy p. 942

## 頁面 745

724
724 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Cystoscopic procedures
• a large number of urological procedures are performed via the
cystoscope. These include cystoscopy, transurethral resection of the
prostate (TURP), bladder neck incision, transurethral resection of
bladder tumour, ureteroscopy and/ or stone removal or stent insertion.
• The majority of patients are undergoing procedures for benign prostatic
hypertrophy or carcinoma of the bladder. The incidence of both these
conditions increases markedly over 60y, and bladder cancer is smoking-
related, so patients frequently have CaD and COPD.
• FBC, creatinine and electrolytes should be checked preoperatively,
because bladder cancers can bleed insidiously. Both bladder cancer and
benign prostatic hypertrophy can cause an obstructive uropathy/r enal
impairment, and drugs and the technique should be chosen accordingly.
• Flexible cystoscopy is largely used for diagnostic purposes, does
not require full bladder distension and can normally be performed
under La. Biopsies can be taken this way, with only a small amount
of discomfort, and skilled surgeons can perform retrograde ureteric
catheterisations. Occasional patients insist on sedation/G a for flexible
cystoscopy. Midazolam or propofol is ideal.
• Rigid cystoscopy requires Ga, due to the scope diameter and the use
of an irrigating solution to distend the bladder and allow visualisation
of the surgical field. If large volumes of irrigant are absorbed, systemic
complications due to fluid overload can result (see % pp. 729–30).
• Spinal anaesthesia works well for rigid cystoscopic procedures and is
commonly used for TURP. Sensory supply to the urethra, prostate,
bladder neck and bladder mucosa is from S2 to S4. Pain from bladder
distension, however, is carried by T10– L2, so a higher block is required.
Many patients will request sedation. In the elderly population, 1–2 mg of
midazolam is usually adequate. higher doses may result in loss of airway
control, confusion and restlessness. a low-d ose propofol infusion is an
alternative. Spinal anaesthesia is advantageous for patients with severe
COPD, as long as the patient can lie flat without coughing.
• Either hyperbaric or isobaric bupivacaine can be used. hyperbaric
bupivacaine usually produces a higher block than the isobaric solution,
especially when the injection is performed with the patient in the lateral
position and then turned supine; 2.5–3 mL of ‘heavy bupivacaine’ 0.5%
usually gives a block to T10. Do not tilt the patient head-d own, unless
the block is not sufficiently high.
• Other short- acting drugs increase options for effective ambulatory
spinal anaesthesia (level T10 and below); 40– 50mg (4–5 mL) of plain
chloroprocaine 1% for procedures of up to 40min, or 40– 60mg (2–
3mL) of hyperbaric prilocaine 2% for procedures lasting up to 90min.
These options provide more predictable spinal anaesthesia, compared
with bupivacaine, and quicker readiness for discharge (see % Fig. 18.2).
• Patients with chronic chest disease tend to cough on lying flat. During
surgery under regional block, coughing can seriously impair surgical
access. Sedation can help to reduce the cough impulse.
• Patients with spinal cord injuries (see % pp. 303–8) often require
repeated urological procedures. Bladder distension during cystoscopy is
very stimulating and prone to cause autonomic hyperreflexia, so a Ga
or spinal is advisable— check previous anaesthetic charts.

## 頁面 746

CySTOSCOPIC PROCEDURES 725
• Take particular care in positioning elderly patients in lithotomy,
especially those with joint replacements.
• Permanent pacemakers are not normally a problem, even with the
almost continuous diathermy required for TURP, as long as the
diathermy plate is positioned caudally, usually on the thigh.
• Implantable defibrillators can be triggered by the diathermy, so need to
be switched off preoperatively (see % pp. 161–2).
• Penile erection can make cystoscopy difficult and surgery hazardous. It
usually occurs due to surgical stimulation when the depth of anaesthesia
is inadequate, and can usually be managed by deepening anaesthesia. If
the erection still persists, small doses of ketamine can be useful.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis (single dose of an agent with Gram- negative
cover) is often required, particularly if the patient has an indwelling
urinary catheter, an obstructed ureter and positive results on
preoperative midstream urine (MSU). Gentamicin 3mg/k g is popular.
• DVT prophylaxis: graduated compression stockings or pneumatic calf
compression devices are generally considered adequate in low-r isk
patients undergoing cystoscopic procedures, as most will mobilise
rapidly following surgery. however, LMWh should also be used
in patients with additional risk factors or those who have recently
undergone other surgery and a period of immobility (see % pp. 273–4).
Postoperative complications of rigid cystoscopic procedures
• Perforation of the bladder can occur and can be difficult to recognise,
especially in the presence of a spinal block, which may mask abdominal
pain. Perforations are classified as extraperitoneal when pain is said to
be maximal in the suprapubic region, and intraperitoneal when there is
generalised abdominal pain, shoulder tip pain due to fluid tracking up
to the diaphragm and signs of peritonism. Intraperitoneal perforations
need fluid resuscitation and urgent surgery to prevent progressive
shock.
• Bacteraemia can have a very dramatic onset with signs of profound
septic shock. If the diagnosis is made quickly, there is usually a rapid
response to IV fluids and appropriate antibiotics (e.g. gentamicin single
dose of 3– 5mg/ kg, followed by cefuroxime 750– 1500mg 8- hourly;
modify according to sensitivities on preoperative MSU). always
suspect this diagnosis with unexplained hypotension after a seemingly
straightforward urinary tract instrumentation.
• Bladder spasm is a painful, involuntary contraction of the bladder
occurring after any cystoscopic technique, most commonly in patients
who did not have an indwelling catheter preoperatively. Diagnosis is
supported by failure of irrigation fluid to flow freely in and out of the
bladder. It responds poorly to conventional analgesics but is often
eased by small doses of IV benzodiazepine, e.g. diazepam 2.5–5 mg or
hyoscine butylbromide 20mg slow IV or IM.
• Bleeding and fluid overload are dealt with under anaesthesia for TURP
(see % pp. 728–30).

## 頁面 747

726
726 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Miscellaneous urological procedures
Table 29.1 presents the important information for those procedures which
are not covered in the individual topics within this chapter.
Table 29.1 Other urological procedures
Operation Description Time Pain Position Blood Notes
(min) (+ to loss/
++++) X- match
Uretero- Investigate 20– 60 + Lithotomy Nil LMa + SV.
scopy obstruction, Check renal
remove function.
stones Possible
antibiotic
prophylaxis
Insert To relieve 20 + Lithotomy Nil LM + SV.
ureteric ureteric Possible
stent obstruction, antibiotic
using image prophylaxis
intensifier
Remove Cystoscopy 10– 20 + Lithotomy Nil awake or
ureteric to retrieve LMa + SV.
stents stent Often possible
with flexible
scope and La
Insert Trans- 15 + Lithotomy Nil Sedation +
suprapubic cutaneous or supine La or LMa
catheter insertion of + SV. Often
catheter into frail patients
full bladder with advanced
neurological
disease
Bladder Transurethral 15– 30 ++ Lithotomy Nil LMa + SV.
neck diathermy younger
incision incision of patients than
prostate at TURP
narrowed
bladder neck
Urethro- Recon- 90– ++++ Lithotomy 300– ETT + IPPV
plasty struction 240 2000mL ± epidural.
of urethra Beware
narrowed by prolonged
trauma or lithotomy.
infection— Consider
very variable epidural for
procedure postoperative
pain
Nesbit’s Straightening 60– +++ Supine Nil LMa + SV.
procedure of penile 120 Consider
deformation caudal or
from penile block
Peyronie’s
disease

## 頁面 748

CySTOSCOPIC PROCEDURES 727
Operation Description Time Pain Position Blood Notes
(min) (+ to loss/
++++) X- match
Circum- Excision of 20 ++ Supine Nil LMa + SV
cision foreskin + La. Penile
block or
caudal useful.
Topical
lidocaine gel
to take home.
La alone
possible in frail
elderly
Urethral Stretching 10 + Lithotomy Nil LMa or spinal.
dilation of narrowed or supine Possible
urethra with antibiotic
serial dilators prophylaxis
Urethral Incision 10 + Supine Nil LMa + SV
meatotomy to widen
urethral
meatus
Orchid- Removal 20– 45 ++ Supine Nil LMa + SV
ectomy of testis— + ilioinguinal
through groin block. Need
or scrotum, to block to
depending on T9/ 10 if
pathology using regional
technique
due to
embryological
origins
Vasectomy Division of 20– 40 ++ Supine Nil LMa + SV.
vas deferens Often under
via scrotal La
incision
Pyeloplasty Refashioning 90– ++++ Lateral 300– ETT + IPPV
of obstructed 120 ‘kidney 500mL + epidural/
renal pelvis position’ PCa. Similar
via loin considerations
incision. as
Children and nephrectomy.
young adults May be
significant
blood loss in
children
Prostatic Minimally 15– 30 + Lithotomy Nil LMa + SV. La
urethral lift invasive ± sedation is
‘UroLift®’ treatment possible
implant for benign
prostatic
hypertrophy

## 頁面 749

728
728 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Transurethral resection of the prostate
Procedure Cystoscopic resection of the prostate using diathermy
wire— monopolar/ glycine irrigation being replaced by bi-
polar resectoscopes with 0.9% sodium chloride irrigation
Time 30– 90min, depending on size of the prostate
Pain +
Position Lithotomy ± head-d own
Blood loss Very variable (200– 2000mL), can be profuse and con-
tinue postoperatively; G&S
Practical Spinal ± sedation is method of choice
techniques Ga, LMa and SV
Ga, ETT and IPPV
Preoperative
• Patients are frequently elderly with coexisting disease and on multiple
medications.
• Check creatinine and serum Na+; suggest postponing surgery if Na+ is
significantly low, as this is likely to fall further with absorption of irrigant.
• heart failure or uncontrolled aF is a particular risk due to fluid
absorption. aim for optimal medical control preoperatively.
• assess the mental state and communication—s pinal anaesthesia is
difficult if the patient is confused or deaf.
Perioperative
• Insert a large cannula, and use warmed IV fluids.
• Spinal anaesthesia: in theory, it is easier to detect changes in the mental
state and signs of fluid overload (see % pp. 729–30); shown in some,
but not all, studies to reduce blood loss; 2.5– 3mL of bupivacaine (plain
or hyperbaric) or consider alternative La solutions (see % Fig. 18.2);
frequent BP check— hypotension unusual with the above doses but can
occur suddenly; check BP at the end when the legs are down (unmasks
hypotension).
• GA: consider intubation if the patient is very obese or has a history of
reflux; intraoperative fentanyl or morphine plus multimodal analgesia
(paracetamol, NSaID and tramadol/ codeine) are usually adequate;
unusual to need opioids postoperatively.
• Blood loss can be difficult to assess. In theory, can be calculated from
measuring hb and the volume of discarded irrigation fluid. In practice,
it is more common to visually assess the volume and colour, but this
can be misleading. Checking the patient’s hb with a bedside device (e.g.
hemoCue®) is useful. Blood loss is generally related to the size and
weight of prostatic tissue excised (normally 15– 60g), the duration of
resection and the expertise of the operator.
• antibiotic prophylaxis usually required.
• Obturator spasm (see % p. 731).
• Fluid therapy: crystalloid can be used initially. Bear in mind that a
significant volume of hypotonic irrigating fluid may be absorbed, so do
not give excessive volumes and never use glucose. Be ready to transfuse
if the hb falls below the transfusion trigger.

## 頁面 750

TRaNSUREThRaL RESECTION OF ThE PROST aTE 729
Postoperative
• Bladder irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride via a three-w ay catheter
continues for 724h, until bleeding is reduced; inadvertent slowing of
irrigation can lead to clot retention.
• There is generally little pain, but discomfort from the catheter or
bladder spasm may be a problem (see % p. 725).
• Severe pain suggests clot retention, bladder spasm or bladder
perforation (see % p. 725).
• Clot retention can give a very distended painful bladder and vagal
symptoms. It requires washout, sometimes under anaesthetic.
• Bleeding can continue and require further surgery; resuscitation may be
necessary.
• Measure FBC, creatinine and electrolytes the day following surgery.
Special considerations
• hypothermia may result when large volumes of irrigation fluid are used
(the fluid should be warmed to 37°C).
• If the prostate is very large (>100g), a simple open prostatectomy may
carry fewer complications.
• The risk of complications increases with resection times of >1h. If
a resection is likely to take longer than an hour, consider limiting the
resection to one lobe only, leaving the other to be done at a later date.
• Bipolar TURP has been shown to reduce the overall complication rate,
transfusion rate and TURP syndrome.
Laser TURP and transurethral vaporisation of the prostate
• Several ‘minimally invasive’ techniques using lasers and other forms
of heat have been developed which reduce the prostate size.
These generally cause less bleeding and absorption of fluid so are
sometimes chosen for patients perceived to be at higher risk from
conventional TURP.
• Laser vaporisation techniques can be done under La on an outpatient
basis. These may be preferred in patients on anticoagulation because of
their haemostatic effect on prostate tissue.
Brachytherapy for localised prostate carcinoma
• This consists of insertion of radioactive pellets through rods positioned
in the prostate under ultrasound control. This is usually done outside of
theatre in the radiotherapy department.
• The patient may require two or more procedures in the same day.
Repeated Gas are possible, but a spinal catheter topped up before each
procedure works well. Consider risks of remote site anaesthesia.
• For a single treatment, a spinal, using 0.5% bupivacaine with fentanyl 15
micrograms, is effective and allows safe transfer to radiotherapy.
TURP syndrome
• a combination of fluid overload and hyponatraemia, which occurs when
large volumes of irrigation fluid are absorbed via open venous sinuses.
• Classic TURP uses monopolar cautery. Therefore, non-c onductive
(non- electrolyte) irrigation fluid must be used to allow diathermy
current to be focused and avoid thermal burns. The most commonly
used irrigant is glycine 1.5% in water, which is hypotonic (osmolality
220mmol/ L).

## 頁面 751

730
730 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
• Glycine is a non- essential amino acid which functions as an inhibitory
neurotransmitter, and it is unclear whether glycine toxicity plays a part
in the syndrome. ammonia is a metabolite of glycine and may also
contribute to CNS disturbance.
• Bipolar TURP has become a more common procedure, which allows
use of isotonic irrigation fluid. hyponatraemia is far less likely; however,
absorption of large volumes causing overload may still occur. a meta-
analysis comparing monopolar vs bipolar TURP found that the bipolar
technique eliminated the ‘TURP syndrome’ and had a lower overall
complication rate.
• The most effective way of managing TURP syndrome is through early
detection and prevention.
• Prevention includes avoiding monopolar cautery (non-i sotonic
irrigation), minimising fluid absorption by using low infusion pressures
(bladder pressure <15mmhg), monitoring the quantity of irrigation fluid
absorbed (consider terminating the procedure if >2L fluid deficit) and
limiting the duration of surgery.
• Signs of pulmonary oedema, cerebral oedema and hyponatraemia are the
usual presenting features. Choosing regional anaesthesia allows for early
detection.
• Early symptoms include restlessness, headache and tachypnoea, and
these may progress to respiratory distress, hypoxia, frank pulmonary
oedema, nausea, vomiting, visual disturbances, confusion, convulsions
and coma. In the anaesthetised patient, the only evidence may be
tachycardia and hypertension. Rapid absorption of a large volume can
lead to reflex bradycardia. hypotension can also occur. The diagnosis
can be confirmed by low serum Na+. an acute fall to <120mmol/ L is
always symptomatic. a quick check of Na+ is often possible by checking
an aBG (use venous blood, unless concerned about acid/ base balance).
• If detected intraoperatively, notify the surgeon; bleeding points should
be coagulated, surgery terminated as soon as possible and IV fluids
stopped. Give furosemide 20– 40mg, and check serum Na+ and hb.
Support respiration with O or intubation and ventilation, if required.
2
administer IV anticonvulsants, if fitting.
• Both severe acute hyponatraemia and overly rapid correction of
chronic hyponatraemia can result in permanent neurological damage
(most commonly central pontine myelinolysis).
• If serum Na+ remains >120mmol/L , fluid restriction should suffice.
If <120mmol/ L and associated with neurological signs, consider
giving hypertonic sodium chloride (1.8– 3%) to restore Na+ to around
125mmol/ L (see % p. 242). Give 1.2– 2.4mL/ kg/ h of 3% sodium
chloride until symptomatic improvement. Correction should ideally
not be faster than 1.5– 2mmol/ L/ h for 3– 4h, then 1mmol/ L/ h until
symptomatic improvement or Na+ >125mmol/ L. Maximum rise should
not exceed 12mmol/ L in 24h.
• Beware of compounding effects on Na+ by other simultaneous
treatments (diuretics, colloids, etc.).

## 頁面 752

TRaNSUREThRaL RESECTION OF BLaDDER TUMOUR 731
Transurethral resection of bladder
tumour
Procedure Cystoscopic diathermy resection of bladder tumour
Time 10– 40min
Pain +/ ++ and bladder spasm
Position Lithotomy
Blood loss 0 to >500mL
Practical Ga with LMa; spinal ± sedation
techniques
Preoperative
• Slow- growing tumours of the bladder epithelium are common in the
elderly. They are best managed by periodic resection of the tumours
within the bladder, rather than aggressive complete removal.
• Commonest in smokers; check for CaD and COPD.
• Check hb; chronic blood loss is common.
• Check renal function.
• Refer to previous anaesthetic charts; many patients have repeated
surgery.
Perioperative
• Obturator spasm occurs when the obturator nerve, which runs
adjacent to the lateral walls of the bladder, is directly stimulated by
the diathermy current. It causes adduction of the leg and can seriously
impair surgical access and increase the risk of bladder perforation. It can
usually be controlled by reducing the diathermy current or intermittent
use of NMBas.
• antibiotic prophylaxis.
Postoperative
• Pain can be a problem with extensive resections; NSaIDs are useful
(check renal function) and oral opioids may be needed.
• Bladder spasm is common (see % p. 725).
Special considerations
• If using a spinal anaesthetic, ensure block to above T10 (see % pp. 724–6).

## 頁面 753

732
732 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Open simple prostatectomy and radical
prostatectomy
Procedure Simple retropubic (Millen procedure): open excision of
grossly hypertrophied benign prostate shelled out of cap-
sule; radical retropubic: open complete excision of malig-
nant prostate and pelvic lymph nodes with anastomosis
Time 60– 120min (simple); 120– 180min (radical)
Pain +++/ ++++
Position Supine
Blood loss 300– 1000mL (simple); 500– 2000mL (radical)
X-m atch 2 units, and use cell salvage if available
Practical ETT, IPPV, remifentanil ± rectus sheath catheters ± PCa
techniques
Preoperative
• Simple prostatectomy is usually carried out in elderly men and can be
treated as TURP.
• Radical: patients are selected if relatively young and medically fit.
• Check renal function.
• Consider COX- 2 selective inhibitors, gabapentinoids and
dexamethasone as preoperative analgesic interventions.
• Consider hDU bed for radical prostatectomy, depending on local
practice and medical factors.
Perioperative
• Prepare for major blood loss with a large IV cannula, blood warmer,
forced air warming blanket, etc.
• a Pfannenstiel-t ype incision is used for simple, and lower midline for
radical, prostatectomy.
• Consider using an arterial line and CVP line or CO monitoring,
particularly in patients with CVS disease.
• Ensure blood is available, and reorder intraoperatively, as necessary.
• Cell salvage techniques can be useful where blood loss is expected to
be substantial (radical prostatectomy).
• air embolism is a possible complication.
• Epidural analgesia is no longer recommended (see the European Society
of Regional anaesthesia and Pain Therapy’s PROSPECT reference, %
Further reading, p. 744).
• Consider using remifentanil infusion intraoperatively.
Postoperative
• For open prostatectomy, La wound infiltration administered at the end
of surgery is recommended. Lidocaine infusion is recommended for
radical prostatectomy. PCa may be a useful alternative.

## 頁面 754

NEPhRECTOMy aND PaRTIaL NEPhRECTOMy 733
Nephrectomy and partial nephrectomy
Procedure Excision of kidney for tumour, other pathologies or
live donor
Time 1– 2.5h
Pain +++/ ++++
Position Supine or lateral (kidney position)
Blood loss Depends on pathology, 300 to >3000mL. G&S/
X- match, as required
Practical techniquesETT + IPPV ± thoracic epidural or wound infiltra-
tion catheter
Preoperative
• ascertain the pathology and surgical incision planned before deciding on
the technique and monitoring.
• Check hb; renal tumours can cause anaemia without blood loss.
• Check BP and renal function; ‘non-f unctioning’ kidney or renovascular
disease is associated with renal impairment and hypertension.
• Consider cell salvage intraoperatively.
• Check serum electrolytes; renal tumours can cause inappropriate aDh
secretion.
• Check the chest radiograph if there is a tumour; there may be
metastases, pleural effusions, etc.
• Radiofrequency ablation (RFa) is an option for patients with small
cortical tumours (<3cm), and those who present a high surgical risk or
have compromised renal function.
Perioperative
• Nephrectomy and partial nephrectomy can be carried out via open,
laparoscopic or robot-a ssisted laparoscopic approaches.
• For large tumours and polycystic kidneys, surgical practice in the UK
is an open laparotomy via a paramedian or transverse incision for a
tumour, and a loin incision with a retroperitoneal approach for other
pathologies or donor nephrectomy.
• Loin incision requires the ‘kidney position’, i.e. lateral with the patient
extended over a break in the table. a marked fall in BP is common on
assuming this position due to reduced venous return from the legs and
possible IVC compression. Further compression during surgery may
result in a severe reduction in venous return and CO.
• ask the surgeon about the predicted extent of surgery; a large tumour
may necessitate extensive dissection, possibly via a thoracotomy, or
opening of the IVC to resect tumour margins, in which case sudden,
torrential blood loss is possible. Occasionally, the IVC is temporarily
clamped to allow dissection and to control haemorrhage; this gives a
sudden fall in CO. Inform the surgeon if BP falls suddenly; have fluids
and blood checked and available to infuse immediately under pressure,
and have a vasoconstrictor or an inotrope, such as metaraminol or
ephedrine, prepared.

## 頁面 755

734
734 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
• Use large IV cannulae, blood warmer, central venous line and arterial
line if the procedure is anything other than an uncomplicated, non-
malignant nephrectomy or a small isolated tumour.
• If an epidural is used, a high block will be required postoperatively, but
use it cautiously intraoperatively until bleeding is under control.
Postoperative
• all approaches are painful; epidurals are useful but need to cover up to
T7/ 8 for a loin incision. Rectus sheath catheters may be useful for the
anterior approach. PCa or an opioid infusion is an alternative.
• Intercostal blocks will give analgesia for several hours after a loin
incision.
• Wound infiltration catheters have also proved very effective.
• NSaIDs are useful if renal function is good postoperatively and the
patient is not hypovolaemic. Use cautiously.
• Monitor hourly urine output.
Partial nephrectomy
• Recommended as the preferred option in organ- confined tumours
measuring up to 7cm.
• Blood loss can be large, as vessels are more difficult to control.
• Some surgeons suggest the administration of mannitol 12.5g,
furosemide 10mg and/ or heparin 3000 units before clamping of the
renal artery in an attempt to maintain renal perfusion and minimise
ischaemia. Cooling with ice can also be used.
• If the renal function is markedly impaired preoperatively, optimisation
of fluid balance throughout the perioperative period is extremely
important. admission to hDU postoperatively should be considered.

## 頁面 756

RaDICaL CySTECTOMy 735
Radical cystectomy
Procedure Excision of bladder plus urinary diversion procedure (e.g.
ileal conduit) or neobladder reconstruction (orthotopic
bladder formation)
Time 3– 5h (longer with bladder reconstruction)
Pain ++++
Position Lithotomy plus head- down
Blood loss 700 to >3000mL, X- match 4 units, use cell salvage
Practical ETT, IPPV, arterial line ± oesophageal Doppler/C VP ±
techniques rectus sheath catheters/ PCa/ epidural
Preoperative
• Consider the use of an ‘enhanced recovery pathway’.
• Check for IhD/C OPD, plus renal function and FBC.
• Book an hDU bed, depending on local practice/ coexisting problems.
• Ensure thromboprophylaxis is prescribed.
Perioperative
• The commonest postoperative problem is prolonged ileus, which
contributes significantly to morbidity and mortality, and several of the
measures recommended are thought to reduce its incidence.
• Prepare for major blood loss; large IV cannulae, blood warmer, CVP or
oesophageal Doppler CO and direct arterial monitoring are routine.
Ensure blood is available, and reorder intraoperatively, as necessary.
Consider autotransfusion intraoperatively. If blood salvage is used,
discontinue it when the bowel is opened.
• If rectus sheath catheters are to be used, insert after induction. Surgical
incision is subumbilical midline and does not permit easy placement of
catheters during surgery.
• Remifentanil infusion gives stable anaesthesia and controllable BP; mild
hypotension can aid surgery by reducing blood loss.
• Epidurals are now used infrequently, but if placed, use cautiously
intraoperatively; there will be plenty of time after the main blood-l osing
episode to establish an adequate block.
• Take measures to prevent heat loss, e.g. forced air warming blanket.
• antibiotic prophylaxis as for bowel resection.
• Use of NGTs is now rare; ask the surgeon if specifically required.
• Blood loss can be insidious from pelvic venous plexuses; consider
weighing swabs.
• air embolism is a possible complication, as in any major pelvic surgery.
Postoperative
• Rectus sheath catheters (for up to 5d), with or without a PCa,
have proven very effective. Visceral pain tends to last for 24–3 6h
postoperatively, requiring parenteral opioids. This technique enables
early mobilisation, return of bowel function and d postoperative ileus/
length of hospital stay. There is some evidence that anastomotic leak
is i with the use of NSaIDs, so use cautiously after checking the renal
function.

## 頁面 757

736
736 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
• Use CVP/ urine output to guide fluid replacement; requirements are
usually large due to intraperitoneal loss and ileus.
• Urine output via a new ileal conduit is difficult to monitor, as drainage
tends to be positional. Following orthotopic reconstruction, urine drains
from a number of different catheters so needs to be calculated each
hour to monitor output.
• Early feeding, as part of enhanced recovery, may be associated with a
reduced incidence of certain postoperative complications.
• Leakage from a ureteric anastomosis may present as urine in the
abdominal drain; confirm by comparing biochemistry of the drainage
fluid and urine from the conduit.

## 頁面 758

ROBOT-aSSISTED LaPaROSCOPIC PROSTaTECTOMy 737
Robot- assisted laparoscopic
prostatectomy
(See % pp. 480–2.)
Procedure Robot- assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy
Time 120– 180min
Pain +/ ++
Position Lithotomy with steep Trendelenburg
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques ETT, IPPV, remifentanil, arterial line
Preoperative
• The commonest use of surgical robots to date is in urology, mostly for
radical prostatectomy (robot- assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy).
• advantages to the patient may include a reduction in blood loss, pain
and length of stay ± a reduced incidence of incontinence and erectile
dysfunction.
• advantages to the surgeon over conventional laparoscopy include
provision of 3D vision, filtration of any hand tremor, scaling of hand
movements, greater range of movements within the patient and a
comfortable and stable position.
Perioperative
• Positioning of the patient is important. Long operative times with steep
head- down tilt have been associated with:
• Neurapraxia (especially brachial). Take care with positioning, and use
shoulder brace. Do not hyperextend the legs in lithotomy.
• Facial/ airway oedema and stridor.
• acid burns to eyes and oral ulceration due to reflux of gastric acid.
Premedicate with a PPI (omeprazole 40mg); consider an OGT (not
NGT due to epistaxis risk) and throat pack, and protect the eyes with
lubricating ophthalmic ointment/ pads.
• i ICP (exacerbated by hypercapnia) and i IOP (beware patients with
glaucoma).
• Insert ETT as short as possible (risk of endobronchial intubation), and
tape in position to minimise cerebral venous obstruction.
• access to the patient is poor, so ensure reliable, large-b ore venous
access on the left side because of robot arm positioning.
• Robotic equipment is locked in position once inserted into the
abdomen, so any inadvertent patient movement can cause grave
surgical complications. a remifentanil infusion works well and allows
intermittent boluses of muscle relaxant only as required.
• avoid using NO.
2
• Communicating with the surgeon may be difficult due to the bulk and
space required for the equipment. The team needs to be familiar with
the audio equipment and also able to undock and remove the robot
quickly in case of an emergency requiring resuscitation.
• Large urine output can interfere with the surgical field; use minimal IV
fluid (<1000mL) until anastomosis is complete (may also reduce the risk
of airway oedema).

## 頁面 759

738
738 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Postoperative
• Perform leak test prior to extubation to assess airway swelling.
• Cerebral oedema may be problematic. a short- acting volatile agent
with remifentanil allows rapid assessment of the conscious level
postoperatively. Most patients experience a degree of cerebral irritation
or agitation initially on wakening.
• Postoperative pain is considerably less than for open procedures but
can still be severe enough to require opioid analgesia for a short period,
in addition to simple analgesics. In some institutions, use of intrathecal
diamorphine up to 1mg is commonly used.

## 頁面 760

PERCUTaNEOUS STONE REMOVaL 739
Percutaneous stone removal
Procedure Endoscopic excision of renal stone via
nephrostomy
Time 60– 90min
Pain ++/ +++
Position Prone oblique
Blood loss Variable, 0– 1000mL
Practical techniques ETT and IPPV
Preoperative
• Usually healthy young and middle- aged adults, but stones may be due to
an underlying metabolic problem or due to bladder dysfunction from a
neurological disability.
• Check renal function.
Perioperative
• Patient initially in the lithotomy position to insert ureteric stents, then
turned semi- prone to place nephrostomy posterolaterally below the
12th rib, under radiographic control— be aware of the potential to
dislodge lines and for pressure area damage.
• Consider a reinforced ETT to prevent kinking, and secure well. The
head needs to be turned toward the operative side, so it is best to
position the ETT in the same side of the mouth.
• Support the chest and pelvis to allow abdominal excursion with
ventilation.
• Support and pad the head, arms and lower legs, and pad the eyes.
• Check ventilation during and after position changes.
• Ventilation may need to be temporarily interrupted for radiographs.
• antibiotic prophylaxis may be required.
Postoperative
• Pain from nephrostomy is variable.
• Multimodal: paracetamol, NSaIDs (check renal function), PCa
morphine or PO tramadol.
Special considerations
• hypothermia can occur if large volumes of irrigation fluid are used.
• Insertion of nephrostomy is often close to the diaphragm, with
the possibility of breaching the pleura, causing a pneumothorax or
hydrothorax— if in doubt, perform a CXR postoperatively.
• Rupture of the renal pelvis is a recognised complication, when large
volumes of irrigant may enter the retroperitoneal space.
• Postoperative Gram- negative septicaemia is a significant risk after any
urinary tract surgery for stones (see % pp. 1035–9).

## 頁面 761

740
740 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy
Procedure Non- invasive fragmentation of renal stones using
pulsed ultrasound
Time 20– 40min
Pain +/ ++
Blood loss Nil
Practical techniques Sedation for adults. Ga/ LMa for children
In the early days of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, patients were sus-
pended in a water bath in a semi- sitting position, which produced a number
of problems for the anaesthetist. Developments in the 1980s meant that
a water bath was no longer required, and more recent refinements of the
ultrasound beam have made it less uncomfortable, so that, with most cur-
rent lithotripters, only few patients need anaesthesia or sedation.
Preoperative
• Patients often undergo repeated lithotripsy, so refer to previous
treatment records where possible.
• Premedication with paracetamol/N SaIDs (note renal function) is
usually effective for treatment.
Perioperative
• Lateral position with arms above the head.
• Renal stones are located using ultrasound or an image intensifier, and
the shock wave focused on the stones.
• antibiotic prophylaxis may be required.
Postoperative
Mild discomfort only; oral analgesics or NSaIDs are adequate.
Special considerations
• Shock wave can cause occasional dysrhythmias, which are usually
self- limiting. If persistent, the shock waves can be delivered in time
with the ECG (refractory period). Judicious use of anticholinergics
(glycopyrronium 200 micrograms) will increase the hR and increase the
frequency of delivered shock.
• Pacemakers can be deprogrammed by the shock wave; seek advice
from a pacemaker technician.
• Energy from shock waves is released when they meet an air/w ater
interface. It is advisable to use 0.9% sodium chloride, rather than air, for
‘loss of resistance’ if siting an epidural.

## 頁面 762

TESTICULaR SURGERy 741
Testicular surgery
Procedure Removal/ biopsy of testis, marsupialisation of hydrocele,
vasectomy, testicular torsion
Time 30min to 1h
Pain ++/ +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Not significant
Practical Ga, LMa, spermatic cord block. RSI/E TT if emergency
techniques (e.g. torsion). Spinal or La infiltration
Preoperative
• Often suitable for day surgery.
Perioperative
• Beware vagal responses— have atropine ready.
Special considerations
• Innervation of testes and scrotum: somatic innervation is via the
ilioinguinal, genitofemoral, pudendal and posterior scrotal nerves
(branches of the posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh) with nerve
root contributions from L1 to S3. autonomic innervation is from the
sympathetic chain T10– L4 and the parasympathetic plexus S1–S 3. Local
techniques therefore need to cover T10– S3.
• a spermatic cord block can be used as an adjunct to Ga or as part of a
local technique for scrotal surgery. The block covers all nerves, except
the pudendal and posterior scrotal branches. If used as part of an La
technique, supplemental infiltration of the scrotal skin is also required.
• The spermatic cord is best blocked under direct vision by the surgeon.
however, if a local technique is planned, feel for the spermatic cord as it
enters the top of the scrotum, and infiltrate 5–1 0mL of La around it.

## 頁面 763

742
742 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Renal transplant
Procedure Transplantation of cadaveric or live donor organ
Time 90– 180min
Pain ++/ +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Not significant to 500mL
Practical ETT and IPPV, CVP
techniques
Preoperative
• Usual problems relate to CKD and uraemia (see % pp. 193–5).
• Chronic anaemia is common (hb usually around 80-100g/L). Do not
transfuse to normal levels.
• IhD is common and should be assessed and treated during workup for
transplantation.
• There has often been recent haemodialysis. Therefore, some degree of
hypovolaemia is common.
• Check post-d ialysis bloods, including K+.
Perioperative
• avoid a– V fistulae when placing IV cannulae and BP cuff. avoid using
antecubital veins or veins on the radial side of the wrist, if possible (they
may be needed for future fistulae).
• Gently fluid- load prior to induction; wide swings in arterial pressure
may occur.
• Commonly used agents that are safe in renal failure include fentanyl,
remifentanil, propofol, atracurium and sevoflurane.
• Consider a central line under ultrasound guidance and monitor CVP.
avoid the subclavian vein (risk of subclavian stenosis which precludes a
future fistula). Consider an arterial line.
• Prior to graft reperfusion, administer fluids to increase CVP to 12–
15mmhg and MaP to >80mmhg to optimise perfusion. Ephedrine
and/ or metaraminol may be used cautiously to increase BP if the
patient is optimally filled.
• Maintain normothermia.
• Many centres administer diuretics (e.g. mannitol/ furosemide)
and immunosuppressants (e.g. methylprednisolone) prior to graft
reperfusion. Check local protocols.
• avoid blood transfusion if possible, although it may be needed if there
is surgical bleeding or hb <80g/L.

## 頁面 764

RENaL TRaNSPLaNT 743
Postoperative
• Regular paracetamol and PCa is usually adequate. a fentanyl PCa
is preferable. Be cautious with morphine due to reduced clearance
and risk of respiratory depression. an epidural/ spinal is not
usually necessary; there is a risk of bleeding on insertion (residual
anticoagulation from haemodialysis, poor platelet function, etc.) and
may cause hypotension. Consider a TaP block.
• avoid NSaIDs.
• Monitor CVP and urine output hourly. Maintain mild hypervolaemia to
promote diuresis. Many units have protocols.

## 頁面 765

744
744 ChaPTER 29 Urological surgery
Further reading
Morkane CM, Fabes J, Banga NR, Berry PD, Kirwan CJ (2019). Perioperative management of adult
cadaveric and live donor renal transplantation in the UK: a survey of national practice. Clin Kidney
J, 12, 880– 7.
Rattenberry W, hertling a, Erskine R (2019). Spinal anaesthesia for ambulatory surgery. BJA Educ,
19, 321– 8.
Dutton TJ, Daugherty MQ, Mason RG, McGrath JS (2014). Implementation of the Exeter enhanced
recovery programme for patients undergoing radical cystectomy. BJU Int, 113, 719– 25.
Berger JS, alshaeri T, Lukula D, Dangerfield P (2013). anesthetic considerations for robot assisted
gynecologic and urology surgery. J Anesth Clin Res, 4, 1– 7.
Irvine M, Patil V (2009). anaesthesia for robot-a ssisted laparoscopic surgery. Contin Educ Anaesth
Crit Care Pain, 9, 125– 9.
O’Donnell aM, Foo ITh (2009). anaesthesia for transurethral resection of the prostate. Contin Educ
Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 9, 92– 6.
Issa MM (2008). Technological advances in transurethral resection of the prostate: bipolar versus
monopolar TURP. J Endourol, 22, 1587.
Maffezzini M, Campodonico F, Canepa G, Gerbi G, Parodi D (2008). Current perioperative man-
agement of radical cystectomy with intestinal urinary reconstruction for muscle- invasive bladder
cancer and reduction of the incidence of postoperative ileus. Surg Oncol, 17, 41– 8.
hanson R, Zornow M, Conlin M, Brambrink a (2007). Laser resection of the prostate: implications
for anesthesia. Anesth Analg, 105, 475– 9.
SarinKapoor h, Kaur R, Kaur h (2007). anaesthesia for renal transplant surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand, 51, 1354– 67.
Conacher ID, Soomro Na, Rix D (2004). anaesthesia for laparoscopic urological surgery. Br J
Anaesth, 93, 859– 64.
European Society of Regional anaesthesia and Pain Therapy. Radical prostatectomy. Summary recom-
mendations. Notes on PROSPECT recommendations. M https:// esraeurope.org/ wp- content/ up-
loads/ 2019/ 03/ Summary- recommendations- Radical- Prostatectomy_ ENG.pdf
