## 頁面 766

Chapter 30 745
Gynaecological surgery
Claire Todd
General principles 746
Evacuation of retained products of conception/ suction or
vacuum termination of pregnancy 749
Diagnostic laparoscopy/ laparoscopic sterilisation 750
Hysterectomy 751
Ectopic pregnancy 753

## 頁面 767

746
746 CHaptEr 30 Gynaecological surgery
General principles
Many gynaecological patients are fit and undergo relatively minor proced-
ures as day cases. Others are inpatients undergoing more major surgery.
Elderly patients often require operations to relieve pelvic floor prolapse.
• Many patients are apprehensive, with corresponding higher induction
doses required.
• pONV is a particular problem. With high-r isk patients, use
appropriate techniques; avoid NO, give prophylactic antiemetics and
2
consider tIVa.
• pelvic surgery is associated with DVt. Ensure that adequate prophylactic
measures are taken.
• prophylactic antibiotics reduce postoperative wound infection rates for
certain operations. Check your hospital protocol.
• Vagal stimulation may occur during cervical dilation, traction on the
pelvic organs or the mesentery or during laparoscopic procedures.
• take care during patient positioning. patients are often moved
up or down the table, when airway devices can be dislodged and
disconnections can occur. pre- existing back or joint pain may be
worsened in the lithotomy position, and if the legs are supported in
stirrups, there is a potential for common peroneal nerve injury.
• It may be reasonable to ask the gynaecologist to administer analgesic
drugs rectally during anaesthesia. Ensure that you have the patient’s
permission to do so.
• Ensure patients are kept warm during longer cases.
• Major gynaecological surgery can incur considerable blood loss and may
be prolonged. Cell salvage should be available for such cases.
• Many gynaecological operations formerly done through an open
approach (e.g. hysterectomy, tubal pregnancy repair) are now done
primarily using laparoscopic techniques.
Miscellaneous gynaecological procedures
table 30.1 presents the important information for those procedures which
are not covered in the individual topics within this chapter.

## 頁面 768

GENEral prINCIplEs 747
Table 30.1 Other gynaecological procedures
Operation Description Time Pain Position G&S/ Notes
(min) X-m atch
Colpo- abdominal 40 +++ supine Nil Ett, IppV
suspension procedure
for stress
incontinence
Cone removal of 30 ++ litho- Nil May bleed post-
biopsy/ the terminal tomy operatively.
llEtZ* part of lMa, sV
the cervix
through the
vagina
Hystero- Inspection of 20 + litho- Nil lMa, sV
scopy endometrial tomy
cavity
Biopsy ±
removal of
polyps
laparotomy, abdominal 120 ++++ supine 2units Ovarian
investigative assessment tumours may
of pelvic be adherent
mass to adjacent
structures.
potentially large
blood loss
Ett, IppV
Myo- abdominal 60 +++ supine G&s Blood loss may
mectomy excision of be greater than
fibroids from expected.
uterus Ett, IppV
Oophorec- removal of 40 +++ supine Nil Ett, IppV
tomy ovaries
repair, repair of 20 ++ litho- Nil Often combined
anterior anterior tomy with vaginal
vaginal wall hysterectomy.
lMa, sV
repair, repair of 20 ++ litho- Nil Often combined
posterior posterior tomy with vaginal
vaginal wall hysterectomy
lMa, sV
sacro- abdominal 60 +++ supine G&s Ett, IppV
colpopexy repair of
vault prolapse
sacrospinous Vaginal 40 ++ litho- Nil lMa, sV
fixation operation for tomy
vault prolapse
(Continued)

## 頁面 769

748
748 CHaptEr 30 Gynaecological surgery
table 30.1 (Contd.)
Operation Description Time Pain Position G&S/ Notes
(min) X-m atch
shirodkar Insertion 20 ++ litho- Nil May need
suture of suture tomy antacid
around cervix prophylaxis and
to prevent Ett (see %
recurrent p. 896)
miscarriage
thermo- thermal 20 ++ litho- Nil May require
ablation obliteration tomy opiods.
of lMa, sV
endometrium
tCrE* Endoscopic 30 + litho- Nil systemic
resection of tomy absorption
endometrium of water may
occur from
the glycine
solution.
treat as
for tUrp
syndrome.
lMa, sV
Vulvectomy, Excision of 90 +++ litho- G&s lMa, sV
simple vulva tomy
Vulvectomy, Excision of 150 ++++ litho- 2units Consider
radical vulva and tomy regional
lymph nodes anaesthesia for
analgesia.
Ett, IppV
* llEtZ, large loop excision of the transformation zone; tCrE, transcervical resection of
endometrium

## 頁面 770

EVaCUatION OF rEtaINED prODUCts OF CONCEptION 749
Evacuation of retained products
of conception/ suction or vacuum
termination of pregnancy
procedure ErpC; stOp/ VtOp
time 10– 20min
pain +
position lithotomy
Blood loss Usually minimal
practical techniques lMa, sV, day case
Preoperative
• ErpC: remaining products of conception may have to be surgically
removed after an incomplete miscarriage. this usually occurs between
6w and 12w gestation. substantial blood loss may have occurred
preoperatively and may continue perioperatively. IV access and
crystalloid infusion are required if the haemorrhage appears anything
more than trivial.
• suction or vacuum termination of pregnancy (stOp/ VtOp) is a
procedure undertaken at up to 12w gestation.
Perioperative
• lMa or face mask. Intubate unfasted emergency patients. avoid high
concentrations of volatile agents due to the relaxant effect on the
uterus. propofol induction followed by intermittent boluses or propofol
tCI and an opioid (alfentanil or fentanyl) is appropriate.
• a drug to help contract the uterus and reduce bleeding may be
requested. Oxytocin 3– 5 units can be given slowly.
Postoperative
Oral analgesics and antiemetics.
Special considerations
• pregnancies beyond 12w can be terminated surgically by dilation and
evacuation. the procedure is similar to a stOp/ VtOp, but there is
greater potential for blood loss.
• If there are symptoms of reflux oesophagitis, ranitidine or ppI
premedication and intubation are indicated.
• If a pregnancy has gone beyond 16w, it may be terminated medically
with prostaglandin. these patients may still require an ErpC and are
more likely to suffer significant blood loss.

## 頁面 771

750
750 CHaptEr 30 Gynaecological surgery
Diagnostic laparoscopy/ laparoscopic
sterilisation
procedure Intra- abdominal examination of gynaecological
organs ± treatment ± clips to Fallopian tubes
time 30– 60min
pain +/ ++
position lithotomy
Blood loss Nil
practical techniques lMa/ Ett, IppV, day case
Preoperative
• Usually young and fit. Give oral analgesics preoperatively.
Perioperative
• Use a short-a cting opioid (e.g. fentanyl).
• administer antiemetics to ensure same-d ay discharge.
• Encourage infiltration of the skin incisions with la.
• the traditional airway management is endotracheal intubation with
minimal doses of muscle relaxants, as cases are generally quick. Monitor
with a nerve stimulator, using reversal agents accordingly.
• an alternative technique for uncomplicated short procedures is to use
an lMa. this is only suitable for non- obese patients; the potential for
gastric regurgitation and aspiration must be assessed carefully. surgeons
may find sV difficult and request paralysis.
Postoperative
Further opioids or antiemetics may be required.
Special considerations
• Bradycardias are common due to vagal stimulation. atropine should be
readily available; ask surgeons to release the pneumoperitoneum.
• shoulder pain is common postoperatively due to diaphragmatic
irritation. although self- limiting, it can be difficult to treat and is d by
expelling as much CO as possible at the end of the procedure.
2
• If significant endometriosis is found and excised, postoperative pain can
be severe and same- day discharge is likely to be difficult.
• Very rarely, CO gas may be inadvertently injected intravascularly,
2
resulting in VaE (see % pp. 584–5). this results in V/ Q mismatch,
with a fall in EtCO, impaired CO, hypotension, arrhythmias and
2
tachycardia. alert the surgeon and resuscitate the patient.
• If an lMa is used, consider premedication with pO ranitidine or a ppI,
and the use of a device with a gastric channel (e.g. proseal™).

## 頁面 772

HystErECtOMy 751
Hysterectomy
procedure removal of uterus (may also include ovaries ± Fallopian
tubes as bilateral salpingo- oophorectomy)
time 1– 3h, depending on surgical approach
pain + to +++
position supine, head- down or lithotomy
Blood loss 250– 1500ml, G&s
practical lMa, sV suitable for vaginal hysterectomy
techniques Ett, IppV required for laparoscopic or open cases
spinal diamorphine useful for analgesia
Preoperative
• Indications for hysterectomy vary from vaginal/u terine prolapse,
menorrhagia and uterine fibroids to gynaecological malignancies.
• patients may be anaemic if they have had menorrhagia or
postmenopausal bleeding.
• renal function may be abnormal if an abdominal mass has been
compressing the ureters.
• pONV is common.
• those who have been treated with preoperative chemotherapy to
debulk tumours are frequently anaemic, frail and malnourished. they
should be considered high- risk patients.
• Cell salvage should be used for all open and radical hysterectomies.
• Ensure prophylaxis for DVt has been initiated.
Perioperative
• airway management as above.
• antibiotic prophylaxis is usually required.
• steep, head-d own positioning is required for a laparoscopic approach.
• Blood loss is variable; some hysterectomies bleed more than expected.
X- match blood early if bleeding appears to be a problem.
• Heat loss through the abdominal incision can be significant. Use a forced
air warming blanket over the upper body during the operation.
Postoperative
• pain is usually reasonably well controlled with oral analgesics for vaginal
and laparoscopic cases. these patients are usually ready for discharge
within 48h.
• Open cases will require additional postoperative analgesia. Options
include pCas, rectus sheath catheters and central neuraxial blockade.
spinal anaesthesia with diamorphine is now preferred to epidurals.
Vaginal hysterectomy
• Often supplemented by an anterior ± posterior repair which reduces
bladder and bowel prolapse through the vagina. It is usually not possible
to remove the Fallopian tubes and ovaries during a vaginal hysterectomy
because of the restricted surgical field.

## 頁面 773

752
752 CHaptEr 30 Gynaecological surgery
• laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy (laVH) is designed to
enable the uterus, Fallopian tubes and ovaries to be removed through
the vagina. the operation begins with a laparoscopy, during which the
broad ligament is identified and detached. Once satisfactory mobility of
the gynaecological organs has been achieved at laparoscopy, they are
removed vaginally.
Total laparoscopic and abdominal hysterectomy
• With advanced laparoscopic techniques, the number of open cases
being performed has d. they are now normally reserved for advanced
malignancies and cases where it is felt that the uterus is too large to
remove via a laparoscopic approach.
• Both laparoscopic and open procedures require good muscle relaxation.
• laparoscopic hysterectomies being performed for cervical or uterine
malignancies are increasingly being combined with sentinel lymph node
biopsies. Blue dye is injected around the cervix which allows sentinel
lymph node sampling intraoperatively. there is a risk of anaphylaxis.
• radical hysterectomy is undertaken in patients who have cervical and
uterine malignancies. In addition to the uterus, the Fallopian tubes,
and often the ovaries, are removed and the pelvic lymph nodes are
dissected out. these operations take much longer, and there is a
potential for substantial blood loss. an arterial line and goal-directed
fluid therapy should be considered. spinal anaesthesia for postoperative
pain relief is useful.

## 頁面 774

ECtOpIC prEGNaNCy 753
Ectopic pregnancy
procedure laparoscopy (less commonly laparotomy) to
stop bleeding from ruptured tubal pregnancy
time 60min
pain ++/ +++ (depending on surgical approach)
position lithotomy
Blood loss Can be massive, X- match 2 units
practical techniques Ett, IppV
Preoperative
• the presentation is variable. a stable patient may have ill-d efined
abdominal pain and amenorrhoea; others may present with life-
threatening abdominal haemorrhage. at least one large- bore IV cannula
should be inserted prior to theatre, and crystalloids or blood products
infused, according to the clinical picture.
• FBC, X- match and possibly a clotting screen should be requested on
admission.
• seek help from a 2nd anaesthetist if the patient is unstable.
Perioperative
• rsI
• Careful IV induction as significant blood loss can be concealed.
• Continue IV fluid resuscitation and actively warm the patient.
Postoperative
• Clotting abnormalities are not uncommon if large volumes of blood
have been lost. send a clotting screen or perform point-o f- care
coagulation testing.
• analgesia requirements will vary, depending on surgical approach. May
require a pCa.
Special considerations
• patients are young and generally compensate for significant volumes
of blood loss, meaning the preoperative clinical picture can be falsely
reassuring.
• In most centres, the operation is performed laparoscopically and
only converted to a laparotomy if there are complications. Be aware
that the pneumoperitoneum may impede venous return, resulting in
hypotension.

## 頁面 775

754
