## 頁面 804

Chapter 32 783
Maxillofacial and dental
surgery
Alastair Martin and John Bowden
Oral/ maxillofacial surgery 784
Fractures of the orbitozygomatic complex 786
Mandibular fractures 787
Maxillary/ mandibular osteotomy 788
Maxillofacial tumour surgery 790
Sedation for dentistry 792
General anaesthesia for dentistry 793
Dental extractions 794
Extraction of impacted/ buried teeth 796
See also
% Radical neck dissection p. 780
% Parotidectomy p. 781
% Tracheostomy pp. 776–7

## 頁面 805

784
784 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Oral/ maxillofacial surgery
General principles
anaesthesia for intraoral/ maxillofacial procedures requires management of
a shared (often difficult) airway. Nasal intubation is frequently used to im-
prove surgical access to the mouth, facilitate X-r ays and allow assessment
of bite alignment. at the preoperative visit, check nostril patency and ask
about epistaxis and the use of anticoagulants. Discuss the choice of airway
with the surgeon.
• Simple intraoral procedures are usually possible using a reinforced LMa.
For unilateral intraoral procedures, an oral ETT (e.g. RaE tube) placed
on the opposite side of the mouth may be acceptable. Oral airways may
be dislodged, and vigilance is required (particularly LMas which tend to
obstruct as they migrate forwards).
• If the nasal route is chosen for intubation, use La and/o r a
vasoconstrictor mixture (lidocaine 5%/ phenylephrine 0.5% or
xylometazoline). There are many varieties of nasal tube; the ‘Ivory
Preformed North- Facing Nasal’ from Portex® is ideal. These preshaped
tubes are made of soft material and cause little nasal trauma. Sizes of
6.0, 6.5 and 7.0mm should be available. Place in warm water before
use to soften the material even further. The tube should be padded
with gauze to protect the patient’s forehead. Consider fixing the ETT,
NGT and temperature probe with clear adhesive film. avoid excessive
tension/ pressure on the alar margin which risks causing necrosis. The
surgeon will need to recheck periodically.
• Patients who have had previous surgery and/ or radiotherapy may have
thick, fixed (‘woody’) soft tissues and poor neck mobility. Intubation
may be harder than predicted by bedside tests. Consider VL techniques
(e.g. CMaC®/ Glidescope® or fibreoptic intubation).
• Protect the eyes with tape and eye pads or surgically positioned plastic
contact lenses (e.g. the Crouch Corneal Protector®).
• Position the patient with the head at the opposite end to the anaesthetic
machine. a long breathing circuit and gas analysis/ spirometry lines
are normally required. Secure the breathing circuit with a tube holder.
Ensure the pilot cuff is accessible and clear from the eyes.
• Stabilise the head with a horseshoe or head ring. For operations on
the roof of the mouth, use a bolster under the shoulders to extend
the neck further. Positioning the patient slightly head-u p will reduce
bleeding.
• Routine use of throat packs is not recommended. If they are used, they
should be placed by the surgeon and a robust system should be in place
to ensure that they are not inadvertently left in situ. This should include:
• Discussion at ‘Time Out’
• a visual reminder (e.g. throat pack sticker and an entry on the swab/
sharps board)
• Confirmation of removal in the ‘Sign Out’ swab count
• Clear documentation.

## 頁面 806

ORaL/MaXILLOFaCIaL SuRGERy 785
Extubation
• There is a risk of aspiration of blood, pus and debris. The oropharynx
and larynx should be suctioned at the end of the case (preferably under
direct vision). Patients should be extubated sitting at 30–4 5° to reduce
bleeding from venous congestion (or in the left lateral position with
head- down tilt if there is a high risk of airway soiling).
• Some anaesthetists extubate the patient using a ‘deep’, spontaneous
breathing technique. Some exchange the ETT for an LMa and allow the
patient to wake slowly in recovery. Others prefer to extubate awake.
• Whichever technique is used, the aim is to avoid bleeding and swelling
caused by coughing and straining. The use of a nasotracheal tube or
LMa, which do not stimulate the gag reflex as much as an oral tube,
facilitates a smoother extubation. Consider also spraying the vocal
cords with lidocaine at intubation.
• If a nasal tube has been used, it is possible to convert it into a
nasopharyngeal airway by withdrawing it until the tip lies in the
oropharynx, inserting a safety pin (to prevent the tube from slipping
back into the nostril) and cutting at the 15cm mark.

## 頁面 807

786
786 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Fractures of the orbitozygomatic
complex
Procedure Elevation of fractured zygomatic complex ± fixation
Time 10– 180min
Pain +/ ++
Position Supine, with head- up tilt, head ring
Blood loss Minor (may be more with internal fixation)
Practical Oral RaE tube and IPPV. LMa/ SV for simple elevation
techniques
Fractures may occur in isolation or be associated with damage to other
parts of the facial skeleton. Interference with movement of the coronoid
process of the mandible by the depressed zygomatic complex may limit
mouth opening. Following elevation, the fracture may be stable or unstable
and require internal fixation. unstable fractures require plating or wiring via
skin or intraoral incisions.
Preoperative
• assess for associated injuries, particularly head and neck injuries.
Treatment of these fractures does not have high clinical priority (unless
there is ocular compromise from retrobulbar haemorrhage). The
operation is often easier 5– 7d later when facial swelling has reduced.
• Make a careful airway assessment.
Perioperative
• Intubate the patient with an oral RaE tube. For simple fracture
elevations, a flexible LMa may be used, but discuss with the surgeon
whether open fixation of the fracture is planned.
• Lubricate and protect the eye on the non- operative side.
• Give antibiotics according to local protocols if metalwork is to be
inserted (e.g. co- amoxiclav 1.2g or clindamycin 600mg), and steroids
(e.g. dexamethasone 6.6mg IV) as requested.
• Be prepared for potential bradycardia (vagally mediated) when the
zygoma fracture is reduced (Gillies’ lift).
• Extubate with the patient breathing spontaneously. Do not apply
excessive pressure over the zygoma with the face mask post-e xtubation.
Postoperative
• IV opioids may be required in recovery.
• Prescribe oral analgesia for the ward.
• Eye observations in recovery and on the ward to detect postoperative
retrobulbar haemorrhage (which would require a return to theatre).

## 頁面 808

MaNDIBuLaR FRaCTuRES 787
Mandibular fractures
Procedure Reduction and fixation of a fractured mandible
Time 1– 3h
Pain +
Position Supine, with head- up tilt, head ring
Blood loss Variable.G&S usually not required
Practical techniques Nasal tube and IPPV. Fibreoptic intubation may
be required
Mandibular fractures can be treated by closed reduction and indirect skel-
etal fixation (using interdental wires, arch bars or splints) or open reduction
and direct skeletal fixation using bone plates. Direct skeletal fixation is more
common. Indirect skeletal fixation is now rarely used, when the patient’s
teeth may be wired together at the completion of surgery. On occasion,
external fixation may be required.
Preoperative
• Ensure careful assessment for associated injuries.
• Make a meticulous assessment of the airway. There may be severe
trismus and marked soft tissue swelling.
• assess nostril patency. Check for evidence of basal skull fracture and
CSF leak, as these contraindicate nasal intubation and require discussion
with a specialist neurosurgical centre.
Perioperative
• Nasal intubation, tracheostomy or submental intubation. The surgeons
cannot work around an oral airway.
• acute trismus makes intubation look potentially difficult preoperatively,
as mouth opening may be markedly limited, but this tends to relax
following induction. Patients with older fractures and those complicated
by infection tend not to relax as much.
• Marked swelling may make intubation more difficult, and an aFOI may
occasionally be required.
• Bilateral mandibular fractures allow i anterior jaw displacement after
induction, but airway maintenance by face mask may not always be easy
due to swelling and loss of jaw structure. an RSI may be appropriate
with suxamethonium or rocuronium (have sugammadex available).
• Gas induction and effective preoxygenation may be more difficult due to
pain when applying the face mask.
Postoperative
as for patients having maxillary/ mandibular osteotomies (see % pp. 788–9).

## 頁面 809

788
788 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Maxillary/ mandibular osteotomy
Procedure Surgical realignment of facial skeleton
Time 3– 6h
Pain ++
Position Supine, with head- up tilt, head ring
Blood loss Variable. Occasionally can be severe. G&S
Practical techniques Nasal tube and IPPV. Consider arterial line
Patients presenting for orthognathic surgery may have malformations iso-
lated to one or both jaws or have multiple craniofacial deformities as part
of a syndrome. Patients are usually in their late teens or early twenties and
are generally fit and healthy. When an osteotomy is performed, the bone is
plated and often transiently stabilised by wiring the maxilla and mandible to-
gether. Rarely the patient remains ‘wired’ at the end of the case. If vomiting
or bleeding were to occur postoperatively, fatal airway obstruction may
ensue, unless the fixation can be quickly removed. This requires expertly
trained staff and adequate postoperative facilities.
Preoperative
• assess the airway carefully. Check the nostrils for patency.
• Check hb and G&S (as per local guidelines).
• Thromboembolic prophylaxis: compression stockings; consider the use
of intermittent pneumatic compression boots in theatre.
Perioperative
• Intubate nasally using a preformed nasal tube (see % p. 784). Spraying
the cords and larynx with lidocaine may reduce coughing on extubation.
• Good venous access. Consider invasive pressure monitoring due to the
length of surgery.
• Put lubricating ophthalmic ointment into the eyes and protect them with
pads and tape or plastic contact lenses.
• Position the patient carefully on the operating table. Place the head on a
ring and tilt the table head- up.
• Mild induced hypotension is useful to help minimise blood loss. avoid
hypertension. Consider remifentanil infusion (0.1–0 .75 micrograms/
kg/ min, or TCI 2– 6 nanograms/ mL, although >12 nanograms/ mL may
occasionally be needed). Other choices include GTN infusion (2–1 0mg/
h) and β- blockade (e.g. labetalol 5– 10mg boluses or by infusion). as a
general guide, maintain the MaP at 60mmhg or above.
• Give IV antibiotics as per local protocol (e.g. co- amoxiclav 1.2g or
clindamycin 600mg) and steroids (e.g. dexamethasone 6.6mg IV) to
minimise swelling.
• administer prophylactic antiemetics (ondansetron plus cyclizine) to
minimise the risk of nausea and vomiting. Dexamethasone is also
effective.
• Keep the patient warm. Measure the core temperature; warm IV fluids
and use a heating mattress and/ or hot air blower. These may need to
be reduced after 2– 3h, as patients tend to overheat.

## 頁面 810

MaXILLaRy/MaNDIBuLaR OSTEOTOMy 789
• Monitor blood loss carefully. hemoCue® is a useful way of tracking hb
concentration in theatre.
• The patient’s jaws will rarely be wired together on completion of
surgery. Ensure that throat packs are removed and the oropharynx is
cleared of blood and debris before this is done.
• Extubate the patient once fully awake. Withdraw the nasal tube
(15cm mark at the nostril); insert safety pin and cut to leave as a
nasopharyngeal airway.
• use multimodal analgesia, including opioid, intraoperatively.
• Ensure that you and the nursing staff are familiar with the position of
any wires that hold the jaws together. Make sure wire cutters are always
with the patient if the jaws remain wired.
Postoperative
• Some units send these patients to hDu. Others send them to the ward
after an extended period in recovery.
• administer humidified O.
2
• Ensure all oral analgesics are prescribed in a soluble form. PCa or IM
opioids should also be prescribed.
• Continue prophylactic antibiotics and steroids postoperatively, as per
your unit’s protocol (usually 24– 48h).
• Prescribe IV fluids. Encourage the patient to take fluid by the oral route
as soon as possible.

## 頁面 811

790
790 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Maxillofacial tumour surgery
(See also % pp. 784–5.)
Procedure Resection of head and neck tumour. May include tracheos-
tomy formation, access surgery, neck dissection, ablative
surgery and graft or flap reconstruction
Time 2– 10+ h
Pain ++
Position Supine, head ring, head- up tilt, pad under shoulders if neck
dissection or roof of mouth surgery
Blood loss Moderate. Group and save is usually sufficient
Practical IPPV with north- facing preformed nasal ETT, or RaE on
techniques the other side. May need tracheostomy. arterial line,
urinary catheter for long cases with reconstruction
Preoperative
• assess airway, paying attention to tumour site and size, relevant
imaging, obstructive symptoms, mouth opening and neck mobility,
anaesthetic records, history of radiotherapy and previous maxillofacial/
neck surgery. Discuss with the surgeon.
• Patients frequently have a history of smoking and high alcohol intake.
Look for cardiovascular and respiratory comorbidity.
• Prepare long breathing circuit.
Perioperative
• Position and drape to allow access to head, neck and donor sites.
• apply warming blanket and insert a temperature probe. Warming may
need to be reduced after 2– 3h, as patients tend to overheat.
• Fine- bore feeding NGT should be inserted before surgery begins if
likely to be needed postoperatively.
• Ensure pressure areas are padded. Check periodically—p ressure
damage and tissue loss can occur with prolonged surgery (especially
heels, elbows, nose and forehead).
• Give appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis as per local protocol (e.g. co-
amoxiclav 1.2g or clindamycin 600mg).
• Give steroids (e.g. dexamethasone 6.6mg) to reduce postoperative
swelling and for analgesia.
• If the surgery involves laser resection, minimise risks to the patient and
staff by reducing FiO, using a laser tube if possible, inflating the cuff
2
with 0.9% sodium chloride (± methylthioninium chloride (methylene
blue)), using smoke- filtering masks and wearing eye protection. The
surgeon should use protective 0.9% sodium chloride- soaked swabs,
non- reflective instruments and smoke extraction (see % pp. 476–9).
• avoid hypertension (see % pp. 1068–9). Normalise BP before wound
closure to check for bleeding.

## 頁面 812

MaXILLOFaCIaL TuMOuR SuRGERy 791
Reconstructive flap surgery
• Maxillofacial reconstructions are performed using local (e.g. nasolabial),
regional (e.g. pectoralis major) or free flaps (particularly from the radial
forearm/ fibula/ anterolateral thigh).
• Major operations may be lengthy, 6– 10+ h.
• The same principles apply as for plastic surgery free flaps (see %
pp. 659–61), with the added complication of a potentially difficult
airway, both pre- and post- surgery.
• Keep the patient warm. hypothermia increases surgical site infection
rates, and vasoconstriction and vascular spasm may threaten flap
survival.
• avoid hypertension. allow lower BP during tumour resection and
raising of the flap to reduce blood loss. Thereafter, aim for near
preoperative BP. Consider advanced haemodynamic monitoring if
familiar (e.g. LiDCO®). avoid excessive IV crystalloid administration as
oedema and swelling may compromise flap blood flow.
• Surgical stimulation varies widely during these operations. Remifentanil
provides good titratable opioid cover and easier BP control. Ensure a
longer- acting opioid is administered before waking.
• Consider regional blocks or La infusions for peripheral donor sites.
• hDu or ICu care is usually indicated postoperatively for fluid balance,
BP control, flap monitoring and rapid airway rescue if needed.
• Traditionally, surgical tracheostomies were often performed because of
the risk of postoperative airway compromise. Sedation and overnight
ventilation on the ICu with a nasal ETT are becoming increasingly
common and may avoid tracheostomy.
• avoid heavy- handed systemic analgesia as this may lead to
postoperative hypotension when the surgical stimulus has abated.
Sedation should be titrated down to minimise the need for fluid boluses
and vasopressors.
• The patient should be nursed with the head and neck in a neutral
position to avoid tension on, or compression of, newly anastomosed
vessels.
Postoperative
• Ensure throat packs are removed before transfer to recovery or ICu.
• assess airway for oedema and swelling. Plan the extubation carefully; it
is often riskier than intubation.
• Keep head- up to minimise oedema, venous congestion and pain.
• analgesia with regular paracetamol, NSaID and PO/I V morphine
(these procedures are often less painful than they look). PCa is
sometimes required and may be useful for donor site pain.

## 頁面 813

792
792 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Sedation for dentistry
Patients who are unable to tolerate dental treatment under La can often
be managed by a combination technique using sedation. These procedures
are usually performed by the dentist in the dental clinic. PO or IV sed-
ation can be provided by short- acting benzodiazepines such as midazolam.
Inhalational sedation can be provided by subanaesthetic concentrations of
NO (up to 50%) in O using a nasal mask— termed ‘relative analgesia’.
2 2
Whichever route of administration is used, it is important to ensure that
the patient remains conscious throughout. The patient must be monitored
by a trained member of staff (and not the operator who may be distracted
by the procedure).
General considerations
• Patients should be aSa 1 or 2. (Patients with significant comorbidities
should have their procedures in the hospital setting with an anaesthetist
present.)
• Patients will require an escort for the procedure and to care for them
afterwards.
• Written instructions should be provided regarding limitations on driving
(as for Ga) and operating machinery postoperatively. The patient
should be told to avoid a heavy meal/ alcohol prior to treatment.
Patients should follow standard starvation guidelines when an
anaesthetist is present and conversion to Ga is a possibility.
• Inhalational sedation cannot be used in patients with nasal obstruction
or those unable to cooperate with breathing through a nasal mask.
• La is used in all patients after sedation has been established.
• The patient should be able to communicate throughout the procedure.
• Resuscitation equipment must be available.
Suitable regimes
• Single- agent regimes are safer.
• For adults, midazolam 2mg IV; wait 90s, then give 1mg every 30s
until sedated. Expect to give 6– 10mg (Society for advancement of
anaesthesia in Dentistry guidelines). Reduce the dose in the elderly.
• Low- dose propofol infusion (only with suitable training).
• O (100%) via nasal mask; add 10% NO for 1min, then 20% for 1min.
2 2
Continue increments of 5% until sedated (up to 50%).
Special considerations
• have flumazenil available for reversal of midazolam.
• allow at least 1h for recovery following IV sedation.
• Following NO sedation, 100% O must be administered to prevent
2 2
diffusion hypoxia.
• The patient can be discharged once they are able to stand and walk
unaided.

## 頁面 814

GENERaL aNaESThESIa FOR DENTISTRy 793
General anaesthesia for dentistry
General considerations
• Ga for dental procedures should be undertaken in hospital and
reserved for patients unable to tolerate La (i.e. young children, adults
with learning difficulties, impacted/ buried teeth).
• Patients with learning difficulties may have trouble understanding the
procedure and are often anxious. a short- acting anxiolytic agent, such
as midazolam, and a topical anaesthetic cream may help.
• Patients may have a more complex medical disorder such as Down’s
syndrome or other congenital abnormality. It is important to exclude
any significant cardiac pathology.
• Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis should not routinely
be used for dental patients. For high- risk patients, prophylaxis may be
appropriate. NICE recommends that clinicians should apply clinical
judgement on an individual basis, explaining risks and benefits and
involving the patient in the decision.
• Patients requiring extensive work can be treated in a day case unit but
may require overnight stay if they have major comorbidities.
• Positioning. There is no longer a place for ‘dental chair’ anaesthesia.
Postural hypotension can easily be overlooked. It is now standard
practice to keep patients supine or slightly head- up.
• LA infiltration should be used whenever possible. Care with very young
children where it may lead to accidental biting/ laceration.
• Dental labelling. Deciduous teeth are assigned letters a– E in each
quadrant, and adult teeth are numbered 1– 8. Roots are indicated by
‘x’, supernumerary (extra) teeth by ‘$’ and buried or unerupted teeth
by a circle around the letter/ number. These are drawn with the patient
‘facing you’ and may be written as a complete mouth grid (as shown in
Fig. 32.1) or as quadrants.
• Simple extractions may be very quick procedures, lasting a few minutes.
LMas (flexible) are preferable for multiple extractions. a prop/g ag
is inserted by the surgeon to facilitate surgical access; ensure that it
does not obstruct the airway. During extractions, airway patency must
be maintained and may require jaw support. When extractions are
complete, a pack is positioned over the dental sockets to absorb any
oozing blood.
• Restoration work can take over an hour and often requires intubation
and ventilation. To facilitate X- rays and bite assessment, a nasal tube
may be required.

## 頁面 815

794
794 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Dental extractions
Procedure Dental extractions
Time 2– 30min (much longer for additional restorative
work in adults)
Pain +/ ++
Position Supine
Blood loss Nil
Practical techniques LMa/ nasal mask (nasal ETT for prolonged re-
storative work)
Preoperative
• usually children 3–1 2y, dental phobics or patients with learning
difficulties.
• Beware of undiagnosed pathology, e.g. heart murmurs.
• Obtain consent for analgesic suppositories, if required.
• Give pre- emptive oral analgesia, e.g. paracetamol and ibuprofen.
• If a sedative premedication is needed, consider buccal or nasal
midazolam (500 micrograms/ kg, max 10mg). Buccal absorption is more
rapid than oral. Effects are variable, and the patient should be closely
observed. higher doses of up to 20mg (off product licence) have been
used successfully in larger adults.
• Ketamine, dexmedetomidine and clonidine are alternatives.
• apply a topical anaesthetic for cannulation if IV induction planned.
Perioperative
• Give propofol for IV induction, and sevoflurane for inhalational
induction.
• Tape the eyes closed.
• Maintenance with volatile agent or IV agent.
• use La infiltration (by dentist/o ral surgeon); opioids are not usually
needed for short day cases.
• Simple extractions do not usually require antibiotic cover.
• Stabilise the head and neck manually during the procedure.
Postoperative
• Place young children in the lateral position, slightly head-d own at the
end.
• Regular paracetamol and ibuprofen.
Special considerations
• The operator may apply considerable pressure during extraction, often
resulting in an airway- obstructing ‘reverse jaw thrust’. The anaesthetist
should apply counterpressure to support and stabilise the head and
airway.
• Beware of potential hypoxia. Give 100% O for maintenance, if
2
necessary.
• Children with blocked noses can be safely anaesthetised using an LMa
(provided there is no uRTI).
• (See Fig. 32.1 for dentition labelling nomenclature.) X-r ays should be
displayed during surgery to ensure the correct teeth are removed.

## 頁面 816

DENTaL EXTRaCTIONS 795
Quadrant labelling: Full set of deciduous teeth: Full set of adult teeth:
Upper right Upper left EDCBA ABCDE 8765432112345678
Lower right Lower left EDCBA ABCDE 8765432112345678
1: central incisor
2: lateral incisor 8 8
3: cuspid/canine
4: 1st premolar
5: 2nd premolar 8 13xx 8
6: 1st molar Example documentation
7: 2nd molar
8: 3rd molar (wisdom teeth)
X: roots
$: unerupted teeth
Fig. 32.1 Dentition labelling.

## 頁面 817

796
796 ChaPTER 32 Maxillofacial and dental surgery
Extraction of impacted/ buried teeth
Procedure Removal of teeth
Time 3– 45min
Pain +
Position Supine, head ring, bolster under shoulders if upper teeth
to be extracted
Blood loss Minimal
Practical LMa and SV, nasal tube and IPPV (extubate awake or
techniques deep)
Preoperative
• Careful assessment of the airway. Check nostrils for patency.
• If the patient has a dental abscess, there may be marked swelling of the
face and severe trismus. aFOI may be necessary (see % pp. 393–6).
Perioperative
• Consider an LMa/ oral tube for simple/ unilateral extractions.
• For more complex procedures, consider a preformed nasal tube.
• Protect the eyes with tape and pads.
• The surgeon should anaesthetise the appropriate terminal branches of
the maxillary division (infraorbital, greater palatine, nasopalatine) and
mandibular division (inferior alveolar, lingual, buccal, mental) of the
trigeminal nerve with La.
• Give an opioid and NSaID/ paracetamol pre- or intraoperatively.
• IV antibiotics may be administered to minimise the risk of infection
(e.g. co- amoxiclav 1.2g or clindamycin 600mg for patients with penicillin
allergy). Check your local antibiotic policy.
• Steroids (e.g. dexamethasone 6.6 mg IV) may be given for antiemesis
and to minimise swelling.
Postoperative
• Balanced analgesia with regular paracetamol and NSaIDs. Prescribe
rescue analgesia with PRN tramadol or codeine phosphate. (Codeine is
no longer advised for children.)
Special considerations
• Talk to the surgeon to ascertain the likely length of surgery. Remember
that some patients require Ga only because they are ‘dental-p hobic’.
The surgical extractions may be simple, and the operative time
consequently very short. a short- acting muscle relaxant may be
required.

## 頁面 818

EXTRaCTION OF IMPaCTED/BuRIED TEETh 797
Further reading
Royal College of anaesthetists (2021). Chapter 12: guidelines for the provision of anaesthesia services
for ENT, oral maxillofacial and dental surgery 2021. M https:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ gpas/ chapter- 12
athanassoglou V, Patel a, McGuire B, et al. (2018). Systematic review of benefits or harms of routine
anaesthetist- inserted throat packs in adults: practice recommendations for inserting and counting
throat packs: an evidence- based consensus statement by the Difficult airway Society (DaS), the
British association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (BaOMS) and the British association of
Otorhinolaryngology, head and Neck Surgery (ENT- uK). Anaesthesia, 73, 612– 18.
Coyle M, Tyrrell R, Godden a, et al. (2013). Replacing tracheostomy with overnight intubation to
manage the airway in head and neck oncology patients: towards an improved recovery. Br J Oral
Maxillofac Surg, 51, 493– 6.
National Institute for health and Care Excellence (2008, updated 2016). Prophylaxis against infective
endocarditis: antimicrobial prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in adults and children undergoing
interventional procedures. Clinical guideline [CG64]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ cg64/
Coulthard P (2006). Conscious sedation guidance. Evid Based Dent, 7, 90– 1.
The Society for the advancement of anaesthesia in Dentistry (SaaD). M http:// www.saad.org.uk/

## 頁面 819

798
