# 眼科麻醉

## Chapter 33: Ophthalmic surgery

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 820-837*

---


## 頁面 820

Chapter 33 799
Ophthalmic surgery
Peter B Williamson
Relevant anatomy and physiology 800
Preoperative considerations 802
Local anaesthetic techniques 804
General anaesthesia and sedation 808
Vitreoretinal surgery 811
Cataract and anterior chamber surgery 812
Strabismus surgery 813
Dacryocystorhinostomy 814
Penetrating globe injury 815


## 頁面 821

800
800 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
Relevant anatomy and physiology
The orbit
the bony orbit (Fig. 33.1) is a 40– 50mm deep, pyramid- shaped recess in the
cranial bones (with the apex slightly angulated nasosuperiorly) which con-
tains the globe and ocular muscles surrounded by loose connective tissue.
Nerves and vessels enter via the superior and inferior orbital fissures and
mostly remain inside ‘the cone’ of muscles. Globe movement is controlled
by the extraocular muscles, innervated by cranial nerves (CN) III, IV and VI
(III + LRSO is a useful aide memoire). the sensory components are via the
6 4
1st and 2nd divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V).
The globe
In relation to the orbit, the globe sits anteriorly, high and closer to the zygo-
matic bone on the temporal side. Needle access is therefore safest either
at the medial canthus or inferotemporally. the ‘axial length’ quantifies the
depth the globe reaches in the orbit, with higher values suggesting a longer,
‘sausage- shaped’ eye which may preclude peribulbar blocks. the sclera is
the fibrous exterior of the globe, protecting the deeper choroidal, middle
and inner retinal layers. Immediately superficial to the sclera is the poten-
tial space bounded by the white and avascular tenon’s capsule, which can
Tendon of
superior oblique
Central compartment
RETROBULBAR
Orbital
Levator palpebrae septum
superioris
Superior rectus
Optic
nerve
Superior
tarsus
Inferior
Inferior rectus
tarsus
Maxillary sinus
Orbital
Fascial sheath septum
of eyeball
Inferior
Peripheral
oblique
compartment
PERIBULBAR
Fig. 33.1 Vertical section through the orbit. Reproduced with permission of Oxford
Publishing Limited through PLSclear from McLeod G, et al. (2012) Principles and Practice of Regional
Anaesthesia, with permission from Oxford University Press. Copyright © Oxford University Press,
2012.


## 頁面 822

ReLeVaNt aNatOMy aND PhySIOLOGy 801
be accessed to administer a sub- tenon’s block. the most superficial layer
visible is the conjunctiva, which is loose to allow eye movement and inserts
into the limbus of the eye (the boundary of the cornea).
The cone
Delineated by the four rectus muscles, the cone contains both key sites for
the action of anaesthetic drugs (sensory nerves, the ciliary ganglion and the
insertion of CN III, IV and VI into their respective extraocular muscles) and
structures best avoided (the optic nerve, and retinal artery and vein). the
aim of a peribulbar block is to deposit La outside the cone and allow it to
spread gradually to intraconal structures, whereas with retrobulbar block,
the needle enters the cone itself and a smaller volume of La is directly in-
jected to the area of interest.
Intraocular pressure
the IOP is made up of aqueous/ vitreous humour volume, choroidal
blood volume and extraocular tone. It is akin to ICP in many ways and the
normal range is 10– 20mmhg in the healthy intact globe. the IOP can in-
crease dramatically during coughing, vomiting or laryngospasm, resulting in
catastrophic expulsive haemorrhage if the globe is open. Preventing these
events and controlling IOP is key and can be achieved through:
• head-u p position and Ga with muscle relaxants
• avoidance of direct eye compression and the pressor response during
airway management
• Physiological manipulation of choroidal blood volume with modest
hyperventilation to an etCO of 3.5– 4.0kPa and avoidance of
2
hypertension/ tachycardia
• Pharmacological manipulation with acetazolamide 500mg IV (reduces
aqueous production) and mannitol 0.5mg/ kg IVI (increases vitreous
drainage), while mindful of the uncatheterised patient due to excessive
diuresis on the operating table
• Minimising La volume during blocks.
Oculocardiac reflex
Unique to ophthalmic surgery, and most commonly seen during squint and
glaucoma surgery, the oculocardiac reflex is triggered by pressure on the
extraocular muscles or the globe itself and results in a powerful vagal re-
sponse via the short and long ciliary nerves. Clinically, this manifests as a
sudden bradycardia (and, in extreme cases, asystole), sometimes accom-
panied by apnoea and vomiting. Prophylaxis against the reflex is via:
• La techniques which block the ciliary afferent nerves (sub- tenon’s and
peribulbar blocks or intracameral La injection)
• avoidance of hypercapnia
• administering glycopyrronium bromide 200–4 00 micrograms.
treatment of the bradycardia is via removal of surgical traction or pressure,
appropriate vagolytics (glycopyrronium 200– 600 micrograms or atropine
300– 600 micrograms) and support of CO.


## 頁面 823

802
802 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
Preoperative considerations
Preoperative assessment
although classically described as the ‘extremes of age’, all age groups can
present for ophthalmic surgery:
• Paediatric: treatment of congenital pathology and strabismus
• adult: treatment of refractive errors, floaters, penetrating eye injury
and ptosis
• elderly: treatment of cataracts, retinal detachment and glaucoma.
the patient population tends to share some common features:
• DM or hypertension: predisposition to retinal pathology and
detachment; relevant as risk factors for cerebrovascular disease
and IhD
• COPD: predisposition to retinal vascular disease, more likely to cough
during surgery
• thyroid disease: predisposition to ocular pathology; relevant as risk
factors for OSa and difficult airway
• Systemic diseases with ophthalmic presentations such as multiple
sclerosis, inflammatory bowel disease, sarcoidosis and connective tissue
disease
• anxiety: very few people are relaxed about the notion of a surgeon
performing microsurgery on one of their most valued organs, let alone
awake with a drape over their head.
In addition to standard preoperative assessment and in- depth questioning
regarding the issues above, make special note of:
• the patient’s ability to lie flat and still
• axial length (if available) on cataract biometry—i f >26mm, it may
preclude peribulbar block
• INR/ aPtt/ anticoagulant usage— peribulbar blocks may be
contraindicated with a certain degree of coagulopathy (exact cut-o ffs
may be dictated by local protocols)
• tamsulosin— predisposes to ‘floppy iris syndrome’ which can make a
routine cataract more difficult.
Anaesthetic strategy
Determining conduct of anaesthesia (La, sedation or Ga) is one of the
most crucial strategic decisions to be made preoperatively.
La techniques can be used in conjunction with sedation or Ga as appro-
priate and each combination will present a different risk/ benefit analysis. La
techniques are usually preferred due to minimising cardiovascular instability
and drug load, providing good operating conditions and maintaining high
list turnover. they can also be performed by most ophthalmic surgeons.
Patient cooperation during block insertion is highly indicative of their likely
behaviour on the operating table.
Consider:
• Patient factors: level of cooperation/ hearing/ comprehension, degree
of anxiety and claustrophobia, movement disorders precluding
remaining still and flat, predilection for coughing, aSa grade and factors
which increase the risk of Ga
• anaesthetic factors for converting to Ga: ease of IV access, degree of
shared airway


## 頁面 824

PReOPeRatIVe CONSIDeRatIONS 803
• Surgical factors: length and complexity of procedure, degree of surgical
stimulation/ postoperative pain, need for normal muscle tone (e.g.
for blepharoplasty), degree of akinesia required and likely impact of
patient movement, multiple site surgery (e.g. donor site surgery for
oculoplastics), need for vision in operative eye following surgery
• Logistical factors: impact on list booking and turnover, level of
postoperative care required.


## 頁面 825

804
804 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
Local anaesthetic techniques
Topical anaesthesia
topical anaesthesia is the least invasive La modality and is quick, simple,
very safe, cheap and suitable for most superficial procedures, including
cataracts. there are virtually no contraindications beyond being able to lie
flat for the procedure, and IV access is not needed. Vision is also intact
postoperatively which is especially important if you are operating on the
only functioning eye. topical anaesthesia is limited by the fact that it confers
only simple surface analgesia and no akinesia, and is relatively ineffective in
the inflamed eye.
• Simple instillation of drops (proxymetacaine 0.5%, tetracaine 1%,
oxybuprocaine 0.4%) is all that is required.
• the surgeon will often supplement topical anaesthesia by blocking the
iris and ciliary body with an injection of La into the anterior chamber
(intracameral) once surgery is under way.
Drugs for blocks
• Lidocaine 2%: more than sufficient for cataract surgery.
• Bupivacaine 0.5%: suitable for block under Ga for postoperative
analgesia, or longer surgery awake if time allows the block to evolve.
• a 1:1 mixture of 2% lidocaine and 0.5% bupivacaine provides balance
between onset, duration and quality of the block for longer procedures.
• hyaluronidase 2–3 0 units/ mL is sometimes added to aid block spread
and reduce IOP, although this must be balanced against the risk of
occasional severe allergy or anaphylaxis.
Volume of LA for blocks
• higher volumes of La improve onset and quality of the block.
• high volumes will also deliberately proptose a ‘deep eye’ and facilitate
surgical access.
• however, high volumes will also increase IOP and make anterior
chamber surgery difficult, especially with glaucoma.
• Sub- tenon’s blocks usually require 73.0– 5.0mL of La.
• Peribulbar blocks usually involve a total of 5.0– 10.0mL of La, depending
on the number of injections and desired effect.
Sub- Tenon’s block
(See Fig. 33.2.) Performing a sub- tenon’s block is simple and relatively safe,
conveys modest analgesia and akinesia and can be performed in most pa-
tients, including those with long axial lengths and/o r taking anticoagulants.
Its principle disadvantages are disruption and oedema of the conjunctiva
(chemosis), which makes some surgical procedures more challenging (e.g.
trabeculectomy, port insertion for vitrectomy), and performing the block
becomes more challenging with successive procedures due to scarring of
the planes (although an alternative superotemporal approach can be used),
and vision is blocked postoperatively. the eye can be unsightly and irritated
at 24– 48h, but this is usually mild and treated with simple analgesia and La
drops. IV access is only usually required if sedation is indicated.
• Position the patient supine.
• apply proxymetacaine 0.5% and iodine drops to the operative eye.


## 頁面 826

LOCaL aNaeSthetIC teChNIqUeS 805
(a) (b)
Orbit
M
M
ON
M
M
Fig. 33.2 Sub- tenon’s block. (a) Making the incision in the inferior nasal quadrant of
the conjunctiva for a sub- tenon’s block. (b) Cross- section through the orbit showing
the position of the needle during a sub- tenon’s block. M, extraocular muscles; ON,
optic nerve. Black triangles, tenon’s fascia; black arrow, sub- tenon’s space; white
arrow, conjunctiva .Reproduced with permission of Oxford Publishing Limited through PLSclear
from Warman P. et al. (2014) Oxford Specialist Handbook of Regional Anaesthesia, Stimulation and
Ultrasound Techniques. Copyright © Oxford University Press, 2014.
• Clean the lids, eyelashes and eyebrows with iodine prep solution, then
retract the lower lid with a speculum.
• ask the patient to look ‘up and out’ or to follow your fingers to the
correct position.
• Identify an avascular area about 5mm away from the limbus in the
inferonasal quadrant.
• Use Moorfields forceps to lift the conjunctiva.
• Make a small incision with blunt- ended Westcott’s scissors; you should
see the plain white, relatively avascular tenon’s capsule.
• In some cases, you can proceed straight to insertion of a blunt sub-
tenon’s cannula in an inferonasal direction and then injection; in others,
further blunt dissection of the plane with the scissors is required.
• Once the cannula is past the equator of the globe (syringe almost
vertical, perpendicular to the patient), you can administer La
injectate— warn the patient they will experience some pressure behind
the eye at this point.
• Usual volume of injectate is 3.0– 5.0mL of La; then tape the blocked
eye closed.
• Complications: if you see considerable chemosis, you might be in
the wrong plane (subconjunctival); more serious complications are
extremely rare.
Peribulbar block
(See Fig. 33.3.) an extraconal injection of La; quick to perform either via
the conjunctiva (cleaner and easier to anaesthetise) or transcutaneously
(if the patient cannot keep eye open) without requiring a speculum; pro-
vides good akinesia and analgesia with minimal disruption of conjunctiva.
however, as a sharp needle technique, it introduces the risk of globe per-
foration (<0.1%) and retrobulbar haemorrhage (0.07%). It is more dan-
gerous in the long eye (axial length >26mm increases the risk of globe


## 頁面 827

806
806 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
(a) (b)
Fig. 33.3 Peribulbar (extraconal) block. (a) an inferotemporal injection for a
peribulbar block. (b) Needle position for peribulbar block. Reproduced with permission
of Oxford Publishing Limited through PLSclear from a) Warman P. et al. (2014) Oxford Specialist
Handbook of Regional Anaesthesia, Stimulation and Ultrasound Techniques © Oxford University Press,
2014; b) McLeod G et al. (2012) Principles and Practice of Regional Anaesthesia. © Oxford University
Press, 2012.
perforation) and is relatively contraindicated with anticoagulants (but safe
with aspirin) and absolutely contraindicated in the perforated or infected
eye. Vision is also blocked for a prolonged period postoperatively. IV access
is a risk/ benefit analysis but suggested, given the risk of systemic complica-
tions (e.g. bradycardia or seizure).
• establish IV access if required and attach basic monitoring.
• Prepare La injectate in a 10mL syringe.
• Position the patient either supine or sitting up.
• apply proxymetacaine 0.5% and iodine drops to the operative eye.
• ask the patient to look straight ahead.
• establish needle entry point: junction of middle and lateral thirds of
a horizontal line across the orbit, 1mm above the inferior orbital rim
either through the conjunctiva or the skin.
• Insert the 25G (orange) 25mm hypodermic needle with slight inferior
intent away from the globe (in case patient moves forwards).
• If the patient remains still, advance the needle perpendicularly to the
inferior orbit floor (if you make contact with the orbital floor, a slight
superior adjustment allows you to stay on target), aiming for the needle
tip to be at the same depth as the posterior pole of the globe (usually
most, if not all, of your needle length is utilised).
• aspirate before administering 5.0–8 .0mL of La injectate; warn your
patient of a pressure behind the eye.
• If using an integrated two- injection technique, or top- up is required due
to poor akinesia, proceed with a medial canthus injection.


## 頁面 828

LOCaL aNaeSthetIC teChNIqUeS 807
• establish needle entry point: at the medial canthus, clear of the lacrimal
apparatus and medial to the caruncle at the very edge of the skinfold.
• Insert 25G 25mm hypodermic needle perpendicular to the patient’s
face, parallel to the medial wall of the orbit, to a depth of 10–2 0mm
and administer a further 2.0– 4.0mL of La injectate, then tape the
blocked eye closed.
• Look for: akinesia of the eye, ptosis and block of orbicularis oculi.
• Complications: local complications include lower lid filling (which can
be remedied with firm digital massage), patient complaining of numb
teeth, globe perforation (if you see involuntary movement of the globe,
stop the block immediately and inform your surgeons) and retrobulbar
haemorrhage (rapidly proptosing eye); systemic side effects include
bradycardia and vasovagal syncope, or seizures in very rare cases.
Retrobulbar block
(See Fig. 33.4.) Retrobulbar block (intraconal injection of La) is no longer
routinely performed due to the higher incidence of retrobulbar haemor-
rhage, globe perforation, La toxicity and total spinal. It is still of clinical
relevance as rapid ptosis and block onset with only a few mL of La during a
peribulbar block could indicate inadvertent retrobulbar block— either stop
injecting or adjust the dose to 2.0– 4.0mL. Inform your surgeon of likely
retrobulbar injection.
Tendon of
Central compartment superior oblique
RETROBULBAR
Orbital
Levator palpebrae septum
superioris
Superior rectus
Optic
nerve Superior
tarsus
Orbital
Inferior rectus
septum
Maxillary sinus
Fascial sheath
of eyeball
Peripheral
compartment
PERIBULBAR Inferior
tarsus
Fig. 33.4 Retrobulbar (intraconal) block. Reproduced with permission of Oxford
Publishing Limited through PLSclear from McLeod G, et al. (2012) Principles and Practice of Regional
Anaesthesia, with permission from Oxford University Press. Copyright © Oxford University
Press, 2012.


## 頁面 829

808
808 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
General anaesthesia and sedation
the main anaesthetic objective with Ga is to eradicate any form of move-
ment during surgery (even inconsequential movement, such as leaning on
the table, is perceived by the surgeon down the microscope), with the
2° objective being lowering IOP via a combination of PaCO control and
2
inducing a ‘tranquil circulation’.
Fortunately, there are some factors which make ophthalmic anaesthesia
slightly easier than one would initially expect, namely:
• the minimal degree of tissue trauma, stress response and blood loss
• La techniques reducing the need for long- acting opioids in most cases.
however, the challenge is:
• having the patient deep and/o r paralysed enough to prevent any
movement right up until the end of surgery, but having them awake and
maintaining their own airway straight afterwards in the context of a high
turnover day case list in a remote site.
• Balancing the best way of controlling IOP via PaCO (intubating
2
and ventilating) vs the technique least likely to cause coughing on
emergence (SGa).
• the patient population is usually aSa 3.
Induction
a standard induction with propofol and a short- acting opioid (remifentanil,
alfentanil or fentanyl) is ideal, in anticipation of analgesia being provided
either by topical drops or an La block.
• even small doses of non-d epolarising neuromuscular blockers (e.g.
rocuronium) are useful in abolishing laryngospasm at induction and
movement of the eye during surgery (the extraocular muscles are
exquisitely sensitive to NMB drugs) but are best avoided in very short
surgery, such as cataract extractions, unless use of sugammadex is
planned.
• Glycopyrronium bromide 200 micrograms is useful to obtund the
oculocardiac reflex and dry up secretions to prevent laryngospasm on
emergence.
• tape the non- operative eye (note this is the opposite of cases done
under block).
• Induction usually takes place on a pillow for patient comfort and to
facilitate neck movement for airway management, but before surgery
is usually swapped for a rigid support pillow (e.g. Rubens pillow) to
prevent head movement during surgery.
• Standard antiemetics are indicated to prevent PONV.
Airway
In many ways, SGas are ideal as they eliminate the need for laryngoscopy
and are more likely to facilitate a coughless emergence; however, this
needs to be weighed against the risk of aspiration and/ or losing the airway
without immediate access to the head.
• Depending on the degree of access the surgeon requires, either a
reinforced LMa or a 2nd- generation supraglottic device would be
sufficient in most cases.
• If intubating, a south- facing Rae tube is ideal in most cases, although
reinforced tubes can also be used.


## 頁面 830

GeNeRaL aNaeStheSIa aND SeDatION 809
Maintenance and ventilation
• Propofol/ remifentanil tIVa is more likely to confer a coughless
emergence without emergence delirium or PONV; however, depth of
anaesthesia monitoring is often confounded by surgical pressure on the
forehead.
• Volatile maintenance with sevoflurane facilitates a spontaneously
breathing patient being transferred to recovery to wake in their own
time, but can be associated with coughing during the procedure due to
secretions.
• NO is best avoided, as some ophthalmic procedures involve injection
2
of gas of precise density into the eye.
• SV via an SGa is suitable for most short cases such as cataracts;
however, some patients will naturally settle at a PaCO which
2
significantly raises IOP and makes anterior chamber work difficult, so be
prepared to take over ventilation if required.
• Controlled ventilation allows best control of IOP but often requires
additional drug load, which makes rapid wake- up after a 10min case
challenging.
• If utilising controlled ventilation, avoid high airway pressures and watch
for subtle changes in the P waveform which suggest the patient is
AW
recovering from NMB or is about to obstruct, and manage these before
they fully manifest.
• Non- depolarising neuromuscular blockers are useful as part of a
balanced anaesthetic technique to help abolish movement during
surgery— regular boluses throughout a longer case (e.g. 10– 20mg of
rocuronium or atracurium) guided by the length of surgery and time to
finish are usually used, rather than infusions; standard neuromuscular
monitoring and appropriate reversal at the end of the case are both
required.
• Intraoperative hypertension causes IOP to rise and should be treated
with IV agents, with common drugs of choice being opioids (if pain is
the cause), magnesium, clonidine, esmolol/ labetalol (although caution
with COPD and DM) and occasionally phentolamine, depending on the
degree of hypertension.
Analgesia
Many Ga ophthalmic procedures do not require long-a cting opioids for
postoperative analgesia as the patients can be given topical La drops or a
block under Ga by the surgeons.
• Notable exceptions are some oculoplastics and vitreoretinal procedures
which require modest doses of a longer- acting opioid such as fentanyl,
morphine or diamorphine, depending on the degree of stimulation
which breaks through the La block.
• a bolus of a short-a cting drug such as alfentanil at induction to facilitate
airway instrumentation usually suffices if a surgeon is going to insert a
block before or shortly after surgery commences.
• If a block is going to be performed at the end of the procedure (e.g.
trabeculectomy), then remifentanil tCI can be used intraoperatively to
obtund surgical stimulation but prevent narcosis in recovery.


## 頁面 831

801
810 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
Emergence
the key objective at emergence is to prevent coughing, which raises IOP
and strains ophthalmic sutures.
• Optimising the conditions and timing for the removal of the airway are
both important.
• additional techniques sometimes employed to remove the airway
include: deep extubation and/ or exchange to an SGa/ oropharyngeal
airway, spraying the cords with lidocaine and IV injection of lidocaine
(1mg/ kg).
Sedation
• If surgery is proceeding under topical or block, it is not uncommon for
the patient and/ or surgeon to request sedation.
• there is still a widespread belief that sedation is universally ‘safer than
Ga’ when, in fact, the patient can be disinhibited, uncooperative and
free to move and/ or hypoventilate intraoperatively.
• Careful patient selection is vital.
• IV access, supplementary O and standard monitoring are required—
2
capnometry attached to either nasal cannulae or a face mask modified
to avoid impinging on the surgical field is ideal.
• Midazolam 0.5– 2.0mg has a role despite the risk of POND, given the
need for both cooperation and anxiolysis.
• Very low doses of propofol (10– 30mg) can also provide anxiolysis and
gentle suppression of consciousness during block insertion.
• Boluses of opioids such as alfentanil (100– 200 micrograms) or fentanyl
(25– 50 micrograms) can be titrated to effect if the patient experiences
pain, but must be offset against the risk of inducing nausea and vomiting.
• allow the patient to wake after block insertion, but before surgery
begins— patients who regain consciousness after this are likely to be
distressed by their change in situation (different room, drapes, light
shining in their eye, etc.) and reach for their eye almost as a reflex.
• Reassure patients verbally; hold their hand, and regain their full
cooperation before surgery.
• have a plan to convert to Ga if required.


## 頁面 832

VItReORetINaL SURGeRy 811
Vitreoretinal surgery
Procedures Intraocular posterior chamber retinal surgery, including
vitrectomy, cryo/ laser therapy, removal/ insertion of oil/
gas, scleral banding and retinopexy
time 90– 180min
Pain ++/ +++
Position Supine
Blood loss None
Practical Reinforced LMa + IPPV + La block
techniques ett (Rae or reinforced) + IPPV + La block
La block ± sedation
Preoperative
• Past medical history often includes COPD, hypertension, DM and IhD
as these are also risk factors for retinal disease.
• Check axial length if possible—p atients may have long eyes (hence the
retinal detachment) which may preclude peribulbar block.
• Patients sometimes come for repeat admissions and are used to having
ophthalmic procedures (it can be difficult to site a sub- tenon’s because
of scarring of the tissue planes).
• ‘Mac- on’ retinal detachments (where the macula remains undetached)
are urgent sight- saving procedures.
Perioperative
• Surgery is long, stimulating and performed in the dark.
• Many require a Ga due to length and complexity of the procedure.
• additional La block is highly advised to smoothe out the intense
stimulation, and is often inserted by the surgeon following port insertion
(either a sub- tenon’s or careful medial peribulbar).
• ensure adequate opioids on board to cover the extremely stimulating
port insertion (alfentanil bolus or remifentanil infusion).
• IPPV via an SGa with either tIVa or a volatile is ideal.
• avoid NO as the surgeons use gases of specific densities and
2
postoperative posturing to hold retinal detachments in place.
• Modest doses of fentanyl, morphine or diamorphine may be required
for postoperative analgesia in very painful cases, e.g. cryotherapy.
• ensure adequate depth of anaesthesia during the final phases of
surgery— the ports are removed last, so the globe is ‘open’ right to the
end.
Postoperative
• the La block is usually sufficient.
• Some patients might require simple analgesics, e.g. paracetamol and
tramadol, especially if cryotherapy was part of surgery.


## 頁面 833

821
812 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
Cataract and anterior chamber surgery
Procedures Cataract extraction and intraocular lens insertion, photo-
coagulation of ciliary body, insertion of aqueous shunt,
trabeculectomy
time +/ +++
Pain +
Position Supine
Blood loss None
Practical topical La
techniques La block + sedation
Reinforced LMa + IPPV + La block
ett (Rae or reinforced) + IPPV + La block
Preoperative
• ensure the patient can be still and flat for cataract extraction.
• highlight any manual handling issues which might disrupt a high-t urnover
list.
Perioperative
• Cataract extractions are almost always performed under topical La or
sub- tenon’s block.
• Requests for sedation are not uncommon (see % p. 810).
• tape a swab over the ear on the operative side to catch irrigation fluid.
• Ga cataracts can usually be undertaken with the patient spontaneously
breathing through an SGa— opioids at induction are to be used
cautiously, given the 10– 15min procedure time.
• Patients with active inflammation, e.g. due to glaucoma, often need a
block as topical La is less effective.
• Shunt insertion and trabeculectomy are longer procedures, which
usually require a Ga and can be blocked by the surgeons towards the
end (owing to the operation being on the conjunctiva itself).
• For longer procedures, IPPV is recommended; using an LMa to facilitate
coughless emergence must be balanced against the risk of aspiration.
Postoperative
• Postoperative analgesic requirements are negligible as topical La is very
effective.


## 頁面 834

StRaBISMUS SURGeRy 813
Strabismus surgery
Procedures extraocular squint correction
time 60min
Pain ++
Position Supine
Blood loss None
Practical techniques Reinforced LMa + IPPV/ SV
ett (Rae or reinforced) + IPPV
Preoperative
• Common paediatric day case.
• Patients are usually otherwise well. Strabismus can occasionally be part
of a syndrome.
• Consider a sedative premedication if the child is distressed (they may
have visual impairment).
Perioperative
• Requires a Ga (IV or inhalational induction as indicated).
• avoid suxamethonium as it alters extraocular muscle tone and there
may be some association between squints and Mh.
• Depth of anaesthesia should facilitate neutral gaze; tIVa with propofol
is useful as it also reduces PONV.
• Be vigilant for the oculocardiac reflex— avoid hypercapnia and be
prepared to treat with vagolytics.
• SV via an LMa is usually sufficient; IPPV may be required if etCO is
2
high; intubate if indicated.
• Multimodal PONV prophylaxis (ondansetron 0.1 mg/ kg,
dexamethasone 0.1 mg/ kg).
• Sub- tenon’s block performed by the surgeon, paracetamol 15mg/k g
and diclofenac 1mg/ kg for postoperative analgesia (avoid opioids if
possible).
Postoperative
• there is a high incidence of PONV, especially with opioids.
• Moderate analgesic requirements, e.g. PO morphine or tramadol.
• Standard paediatric day case concerns.


## 頁面 835

841
814 ChaPteR 33 Ophthalmic surgery
Dacryocystorhinostomy
Procedures eUa tear duct, insertion of drainage tube,
dacryocystorhinostomy
time 45min
Pain +/ ++
Position Supine + head- up
Blood loss Low, but near airway
Practical techniques ett (Rae or reinforced) + IPPV
Reinforced LMa + IPPV
Preoperative
• Usual concerns for eye and eNt surgery apply.
• establish if the patient is likely to tolerate hypotension.
Perioperative
• Standard anaesthetic induction of choice as indicated.
• Using an SGa avoids complications of intubation, but blood may soil
the airway in some difficult procedures.
• Multimodal approach to minimising blood loss: Moffett’s solution/
co- phenylcaine to the nose after induction, IPPV desirable as moderate
hypocapnia reduces blood loss, head- up tilt to improve venous
drainage, moderate induced hypotension (remifentanil can be useful).
• traditionally, a throat pack was used for all cases, but this is falling out
of favour based on risk/ benefit.
• analgesia usually consists of paracetamol, an NSaID and remifentanil
infusion plus a bolus of longer- acting opioid.
• Magnesium can also be useful both to reduce BP and as an analgesic.
• ask your surgeon to give La to the ducts if possible.
Postoperative
• Postoperative analgesia can be provided by paracetamol, an NSaID and
an oral opioid such as tramadol or codeine.


## 頁面 836

PeNetRatING GLOBe INjURy 815
Penetrating globe injury
Procedures eUa, repair of globe rupture, closure of
punctum, enucleation
time ++/ +++
Pain +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques ett (Rae or reinforced) + IPPV
Preoperative
• In addition to standard anaesthetic concerns, adults with penetrating
eye injury are often extremely anxious, in pain and unfasted.
• Children represent a particular problem as they are usually also
uncooperative, crying and rubbing their eye.
• Surgery is an emergency, as coughing or straining can result in expulsive
haemorrhage of globe contents, but must be balanced against fasting
and optimising for Ga.
• Use preoperative opioid analgesia with extreme caution (as vomiting is
catastrophic) and give pre- emptive antiemetics.
Perioperative
• Patients should generally be treated as being at risk of aspiration,
rendering SGas less useful.
• Depending on the clinical scenario, induction can be ‘ophthalmic’ or an
RSI for rapid airway control in the unfasted patient, or have elements
of both.
• RSI dose of rocuronium (1.0– 1.2mg/ kg) with rescue dose of
sugammadex (16mg/ kg) on standby in case of difficult airway is ideal.
• Suxamethonium raises IOP (vs induction agents which lower it) and
familiarity with its use is falling; however, it may still be used.
• Intubating with VL as 1st- line reduces the pressor response and
removes the need for multiple laryngoscopies with difficult airways.
• La techniques are not effective (or even possible) with these cases;
long- acting IV opioids are commonly required.
Postoperative
• Recovery analgesia can be provided with topical La drops and boluses
of fentanyl, morphine or diamorphine as required.
• Regular ward analgesia can be paracetamol, an NSaID of choice and a
PRN weak opioid given PO.
Further reading
anker R, Kaur N (2017). Regional anaesthesia for ophthalmic surgery. BJA Educ, 17, 221– 7. M
https:// doi.org/ 10.1093/ bjaed/ mkw078


## 頁面 837

861

