# 放射與心臟麻醉

## Chapter 34: Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 838-857*

---


## 頁面 838

Chapter 34 817
Anaesthesia for radiology
and cardiology
Alex Wickham
Anaesthesia for diagnostic imaging 818
Anaesthesia for CT 819
Anaesthesia for MRI 820
Anaesthesia for interventional radiology 823
Katherine Holmes, Craig Dunlop and David
Tomlinson
Anaesthesia for cardiology procedures 826
Anaesthesia for cardioversion 828
Anaesthesia for angiography 829
Anaesthesia for cardiac device insertion and removal 830
Anaesthesia for electrophysiology procedures (AF and VT
ablation) 832
Anaesthesia for transcatheter aortic valve implantation 834
See also
% Endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms p. 580
% Endovascular thrombectomy p. 582
% Endovascular stenting of elective or emergency abdominal
aortic aneurysm p. 597
% Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta
p. 1000


## 頁面 839

881
818 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for diagnostic imaging
Anaesthetists are increasingly working within medical imaging departments.
however, the environment remains potentially hazardous, and the equip-
ment unfamiliar. Ensure that experienced, trained assistance and full moni-
toring are available. Familiarise yourself with the staff and surroundings.
Locate the nearest resuscitation facilities (self- inflating bag/ mask, portable
O, ‘crash’ trolley and defibrillator) and confirm that your assistant and the
2
radiographers also know where these are located.
Indications for anaesthesia
• Young or uncooperative children. Infants (under 2mo) may sleep
through a scan if given a feed and wrapped up well.
• Older children or adults with psychological, behavioural or movement
disorders.
• Acute trauma patients or patients receiving intensive care.
• Interventional procedures under ultrasound, CT or MRI guidance that
require analgesia, sedation or anaesthesia.
Anaesthesia: general points
• patients requiring anaesthesia for elective scans have a range of
problems. Check the indications for the scan and the nature of the
underlying pathology, e.g. developmental delay, epilepsy, malignancy,
psychiatric disease or movement disorders. Beware the ‘undiagnosed’
paediatric patient and syndromes with CVS manifestations.
• Choice of sedation or GA depend upon individual patient needs, the
nature of the scan and the skills of the anaesthetist.
• Check whether the anaesthetic machines are using piped gases or
cylinders. If using cylinders, confirm that a full spare O cylinder is
2
immediately available.
• plan the location of the anaesthetic machine, suction, monitoring
and the configuration and routing of the breathing system with
radiographers in advance. Ensure the breathing circuit is sufficiently long
for any gantry movement.
• Decide where to induce the patient—a dedicated induction area may
not be available or may be very small. It is usual to induce on a tilting
trolley, then transfer to the scanner when anaesthetised.
• Certain equipment configurations (e.g. anaesthetic machine in the scan
room and monitors in the control room) may require two anaesthetists
to manage the patient safely.
• Satisfactory recovery facilities must be available, i.e. an appropriately
equipped recovery bay staffed by an experienced recovery nurse near
the scanner. If not available, arrangements for safe transfer of the
patient to an operating department recovery room must exist.
• Intensive care patients requiring diagnostic imaging should be managed
with full transport monitoring and ventilatory support. Ideally, the ICU
medical team should supervise the patient and review the scan with the
reporting radiologist before return to the ICU.


## 頁面 840

AnAESThESIA FOR CT 819
Anaesthesia for CT
• CT scanning does not restrict the type of equipment used, but space
can be limited, so compact machines and monitors are ideal.
• The patient, anaesthetic machine and monitors must all be visible from
the control room.
• The patient’s head is usually accessible during CT scanning, so an SGA
may be used if airway protection is not required.
• Anaesthesia or sedation sufficient to produce immobility and lack of
awareness is all that is required for diagnostic procedures.
Hazards
• CT scanning uses ionising radiation, so it is preferable for the
anaesthetist to monitor the patient from outside the scan room. If it
is necessary to remain near the patient, wear appropriate radiation
protection and use barriers if available.
• Cannulae, catheters, drains and ETTs can pull out during movement of
the patient through the scanner— check nothing snags beforehand.
Contrast media
• IV contrast media for X- ray imaging are usually iodine- based, non-i onic,
water- soluble compounds. Agents may trigger allergic reactions (ask
about iodine sensitivity).
• Radiographers will usually give IV contrast, but you may be asked to
administer it in anaesthetised/ paediatric patients. The radiographers
should ensure the correct volume (dependent on preparation,
investigation, age and weight) is provided according to local policy.
• Some ‘dynamic’ investigations (e.g. aortography) require contrast to be
administered while the scan is occurring.
• Contrast is viscous and can be difficult to inject through small cannulae
or injection ports.
• Automated contrast injectors should not be connected to standard
central venous lines. The high pressure developed by the rapid injection
of viscous medium down a long, narrow lumen can burst the line.
powerLine® catheters allow power- injection of contrast media.
• Contrast media may cause kidney injury in patients with dehydration
or impaired renal function, so ensure patients are adequately hydrated.
Lactic acidosis can be precipitated in patients taking biguanides
(metformin)— ideally avoid for 48h before and after the scan.
Practical considerations
• Move metal- containing objects (e.g. ECG leads, pressure transducer
cables) away from the area being scanned to prevent X-r ay artefact.
• Thoracic and abdominal scans may require ‘breath- holds’ of a few
seconds to reduce respiratory movement artefact. Both paralysed and
spontaneously breathing patients can be ventilated manually, and their
lungs held in inspiration for each individual scan.
• The patient’s arms ideally need to be positioned above the head during
thoracic and abdominal scans. Soft Velcro straps attached to the gantry
or wide adhesive tape are useful for securing the limbs.


## 頁面 841

820
820 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for MRI
MRI uses superconducting electromagnets to generate powerful mag-
netic fields. Computers create images from the radiofrequency signals
generated by hydrogen nuclei that move in and out of alignment with the
high- frequency magnetic pulses. Most scanners use 1.5–3 .0T magnets, but
higher- strength machines are entering clinical practice. MRI produces de-
tailed images, particularly of soft tissues, and is free from the dangers of
ionising radiation. Increasingly, invasive procedures are being performed
within MRI scanners, including some operations. provision of safe anaes-
thesia for MRI requires specialised equipment and careful organisation.
The MRI scanner is an unpleasant claustrophobic environment—t he pa-
tient must lie in a narrow, noisy tunnel, with the imaged body part sur-
rounded by a radiofrequency coil (a frame-l ike device). Typical scans last
15– 25min, but complex scans may take much longer. Up to 3% of adults
cannot tolerate scanning without sedation or anaesthesia.
Hazards
• Displacement from static magnetic field: small ferromagnetic materials
within the 3mT field can become projectiles which may injure or kill,
while large objects can crush or trap. Foreign bodies (some heart
valves, aneurysm clips, steel splinters in the eye) can move, causing
haemorrhage or blindness. Implanted devices (cardiac pacemakers
or neurological stimulators) may move or be inactivated or
reprogrammed. Electric motors in syringe pumps may run erratically,
and magnetic media (credit cards, mobile phones) will be erased.
Beyond the 0.5mT boundary is considered safe.
• noise: rapid magnetic field changes can cause >80dB noise and damage
hearing. Use MRI-safe earplugs or defenders during scan.
• Oscillating radiofrequency fields can cause heating, rapidly causing
severe burns. Remove or limit conductive materials, e.g. metal in
clothing. pacemaker wires may also heat— ensure they are MRI safe.
• helium escape: in the event of an emergency magnetic field shutdown
(a ‘quench’), liquid helium coolant rapidly expands to a gas. This should
vent outside the building, but some may enter the MRI suite, causing a
hypoxic environment, requiring urgent evacuation.
• Gadolinium contrast agents are used in up to 30% of scans. Side effects
include headache, nausea, dizziness, local burning and wheals. Severe
hypotension/ anaphylactic reactions are rare (71:100 000). newer
agents are associated with lower risk of nephrogenic sclerosing fibrosis.
Patient and staff safety
• To avoid injury, all patients having an MRI scan must complete a
screening/ consent form. For children or sedated ICU patients, such
forms must be completed on their behalf by relatives or staff.
• Staff must also complete a screening questionnaire and leave metallic
objects, mobile phones, pagers, wallets, etc. outside the room.
• patients and staff with cardiac pacemakers must remain outside the
0.5mT boundary.


## 頁面 842

AnAESThESIA FOR MRI 821
Equipment safety
All equipment and implants are classified into one of three categories:
• MRI Safe: contains no material that would cause a hazard. Can be taken
right into the scanner.
• MRI Conditional: safe for use under conditions specified by the
manufacturer. Do not place MRI conditional kit on the moving table as it
might move beyond the 5mT line.
• MRI Unsafe: must not be taken into the MRI scanner.
The scan room is usually shielded to stop external electrical interference
swamping the MRI signals. All electrical equipment in the scan room must
also be fully shielded. Electrical conductors entering the room (e.g. moni-
toring cables) require special radiofrequency filters.
Two alternative approaches are feasible
• Specialised ‘MRI Conditional’ equipment within the scan room
• Conventional kit outside the magnetic field in the control room.
Departments should standardise on one approach, depending on space,
funds and frequency of use. Each approach has its pros and cons.
Typical setup
• Induction and recovery area adjacent to, but outside the scan room,
equipped with conventional anaesthetic machine and monitoring.
• non-m agnetic tipping trolley for patient transfer into the scanner.
• piped gases, scavenging and suction in induction and scan areas.
• Either a compact anaesthetic machine and ventilator in the control
room with a 10m coaxial (Bain) breathing system and a gas/a gent
side- stream analyser with capnograph display fitted with an extended
sampling tube (increases the response time by 5– 10s).
• Or an ‘MRI Conditional’ anaesthetic machine in the scan room with
circle circuit.
• ‘MRI Conditional’ monitoring devices: fibreoptic pulse oximeter probe
with shielded cable; ECG with carbon fibre leads and electrodes; nIBp
cuffs with an extended hose and non- metallic connectors.
• Multiple manufacturers produce ‘MRI Conditional’ monitor units within
the scan room, with a slave unit in the control room.
Practical considerations and techniques
Airway
• patient access is restricted physically and ‘magnetically’. Ensure the
airway and vascular access are well secured.
• Intubate and ventilate: babies and small children (<10kg), patients with
raised ICp (or suspected raised ICp) or patients needing a protected
airway. A RAE tube keeps the breathing circuit clear of the coil in
patients having head scans.
• SV via an SGA can be considered in larger children and adults with no
risk of raised ICp. Do not use a flexible LMA containing a metal wire
spiral. i- gels have no metallic components.
• Tape the pilot balloon of a cuffed ETT or LMA outside the coil to avoid
image distortion by the metal spring.


## 頁面 843

822
822 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Sedation
• Benzodiazepine sedation (pO or IV) may be used for healthy, but
claustrophobic adults. Strong analgesia may be required for patients
with severe back or root compression pain to tolerate positioning.
• The role of sedation for MRI scanning in children is unclear. Some
children’s centres have reported successes with structured sedation
programmes, e.g. using dexmedetomidine. however, the safety of
having heavily sedated children in the medical imaging department
without direct anaesthetic supervision has been questioned.
Tips for IPPV through a 10m breathing system
• Use a system that functions as a ‘T- piece’ (Mapleson D or E), so dead
space is unaffected by the length. Ayre’s T-p iece and Bain systems work
well. Both can be used for babies and small children.
• Airway pressures measured near the ventilator may not accurately
represent distal pressures at the ETT.
• V delivered to the lungs will be reduced by ‘compression losses’ of the
T
gas within the system and by expansion of the tubing during inspiration,
making it difficult to compensate for significant leaks around uncuffed
ETTs— use a slightly larger tube to minimise leaks.
• As a result of these effects, IppV using a simple pressure generator
(e.g. penlon nuffield 200 with a newton valve) may not be effective in
children weighing >15kg.
• i expiratory resistance of some long systems (e.g. Ayre’s T-p iece)
generates a pEEp which increases with FGF.
Intensive care patients
• MRI scans in ICU patients confer greater risk and require detailed
planning. The risk/ benefit balance should be assessed by senior
clinicians. Avoid scanning patients who are haemodynamically or
otherwise unstable unless this will have a substantial impact on
outcome.
• As the patient may lack capacity, full checks (including, if necessary, plain
radiographs) must be performed to confirm there are no hazardous
metallic implants or foreign bodies present.
• Conventional monitoring (including ICp transducers and temporary
pacing wires) should be removed or replaced with ‘MRI Safe’ equipment
before the patient enters the scan room.
• Infusion lines must be long enough to allow pumps to be located at a
safe distance from the magnet— ideally outside the scan room. prepare
duplicate pumps in the control room, with extended infusion lines
threaded with the breathing system into the scan room. Connect the
patient to the running infusions while outside the room. Be especially
cautious with infusions such as noradrenaline— check the patient is
stable, then move into the scanner.
Cardiac arrest
• Start basic life support (BLS) with a non- metallic self- inflating bag.
Rapidly remove the patient from the scan room on a non-m agnetic
trolley and continue ALS outside the 0.5mT boundary.
• Do not attempt ALS in the scan room and do not allow the cardiac
arrest team into the scan room.


## 頁面 844

AnAESThESIA FOR InTERVEnTIOnAL RADIOLOGY 823
Anaesthesia for interventional radiology
Interventional radiology uses a variety of imaging modalities (fluoroscopy,
CT, ultrasound or MRI) to guide minimally invasive diagnostic or thera-
peutic procedures. Interventional radiology procedures avoid open sur-
gery, thereby reducing post-p rocedure pain and shortening recovery times.
Interventional radiology suites are usually ‘remote’, in the X- ray depart-
ment, but hybrid radiology/ theatre suites are increasingly common.
Indications for anaesthesia
• patients required to be very still for long periods of time
• painful procedures
• paediatric patients.
Anaesthesia for interventional radiology: general points
• hazards are as previously described for CT and MRI.
• Interventional radiology suites are often ‘isolated’—d epending on the
workload, invest in an anaesthesia trolley to securely store familiar
equipment and drugs.
• Anaesthetic technique and airway choice depend on the patient’s
condition, planned procedure, positioning required, fasting status
and the need for airway protection. Options include monitored care,
sedation, GA and regional techniques or a combination.
• Scavenging may not be possible, so an activated charcoal absorber
(e.g. Aldasorber) may be required or TIVA may be used. Induction
and emergence generally take place within the radiology suite, while
recovery may be in main theatres.
• The interventional radiology table usually does not tilt, will be controlled
by a radiographer and may move during procedures. It is recommended
to induce anaesthesia on an anaesthetic trolley and transfer the patient
after induction.
• Ensure lines and tubes are secured and that there is sufficient circuit
length to account for table and fluoroscopy C- arm movements.
• Access to the patient may be limited by radiological equipment—e nsure
you have IV access with a three- way tap and extension tubing.
Vascular procedures: angioplasty/ stenting
• A balloon- tipped catheter is inserted into a narrow or blocked vessel,
and the balloon inflated. A stent may be placed to keep it open. Some
vascular, cardiac and trauma- related procedures do not require GA but
require an anaesthetist for monitored care. Balloon dilation/t emporary
occlusion of certain vascular structures can cause vagal responses.
• Endovascular repair of AAA (see % pp. 597–8) is associated with a
lower mortality and may be favoured in significantly comorbid patients
at high perioperative risk from open surgery. This may be done under
regional, neuraxial anaesthesia (± sedation) or GA. Such procedures
may now take place in hybrid interventional radiology–t heatre suites.
• patients may be required to lie supine for several hours after the
procedure to prevent puncture site bleeding.


## 頁面 845

824
824 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Embolisations
• Blood vessels are selectively occluded to treat or prevent bleeding and
stop tumour growth. A variety of agents, including metal coils, special
foams, plugs and microbeads, are used to induce the embolus.
• Superficial procedures, the use of alcohol for embolisation or procedures
involving AVMs can be very painful and require sedation or GA.
• Interventional radiology treatment of intracranial aneurysms requires
GA because the patient must be completely still. Similar anaesthetic
techniques as for craniotomy (see % pp. 561–2; % pp. 580–1), with an
ETT, invasive monitoring, avoidance of changes in Cpp and maintenance
of normocapnia and normothermia, should be used.
• Uterine artery embolisation is included in nICE guidance [IpG367] for
fibroid disease. Balloon occlusion of uterine arteries can be considered
prior to CS in a patient anticipated to bleed, or can be inserted
emergently in the management of 1° postpartum haemorrhage (though
the logistical challenges to facilitate this transfer are often considerable).
• Chemoembolisation: combination of delivering cancer treatment
directly to a tumour and then blocking its blood supply.
• patients who require emergency embolisation for trauma-r elated
haemorrhage (e.g. spleen, kidney, liver, intercostal arteries) require
the presence of an anaesthetist, even if not having sedation or GA, to
manage the transfusion and all other aspects of their care.
Radiofrequency ablation
• RFA destroys tissue by heating, e.g. a tumour. Although the ablation
of the tumour is fairly quick, the localisation can take time and the
procedure is painful and stimulating, so requires a GA.
• RFA is commonly used to treat hepatic and renal tumours—e ither
metastases, difficult- to- reach tumours, or tumours in those patients
who are too frail for an open procedure.
Thrombolysis and thrombectomy
• Minimally invasive dissolution, or removal, of blood clots to improve
blood supply. Contrast media is used to help define the clot, which is then
dissolved by medication or removed by a mechanical device. This can
be used in the acute management of CVE, to treat arteries in diseased
vascular beds, DVT, coronary emboli, pEs and thromboses in fistulae.
• Anaesthetic technique for acute CVE thrombectomy should be
determined on an individual patient basis. Whether LA only, sedation
or GA is chosen, adherence to standard physiological targets (see
% pp. 558–60; % pp. 578–9) is required.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
(See % p. 698.)
• A stent, inserted via the jugular vein, is used to connect the portal vein
and hepatic vein, thereby reducing portal hypertension and bleeding risk
in patients with end- stage liver disease.
• GA with ETT and invasive monitoring is the preferred technique due
to procedure duration and the patient’s physiological condition and
comorbid disease. Coagulopathy is common, may be profound, and
should be corrected.
• peri- procedural risks include haemorrhage, heart failure and
encephalopathy. postoperative care may require hDU.


## 頁面 846

AnAESThESIA FOR InTERVEnTIOnAL RADIOLOGY 825
Other procedures
• Vertebroplasty/ cementoplasty: injection of cement into bone to reduce
pain in tumours and fractures. Can be painful and requires sedation or
GA.
• Cryoablation: destruction of tissue by freezing. Typically not painful, and
often sedation is all that is required.
• Vascular catheter placement: sedation and LA are suitable for most
patients; GA will be required for children.
• GI viscera can be dilated and stented. Oesophageal dilation can be
painful and requires analgesia and consideration of requirement for
airway protection in case of regurgitation.
• IVC filter insertion: not painful.
Fluid aspiration, biopsies and percutaneous drain
placements
• Usually performed under ultrasound guidance, but may require CT for
deeper structures. Typically not painful.
• Discuss positioning and apnoeic periods with the radiologist
pre- procedure.


## 頁面 847

826
826 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for cardiology procedures
These procedures generally take place in the cardiac catheterisation labora-
tory (the ‘cath lab’) and many of the additional considerations of anaes-
thesia for radiology apply. Establishing good team communication from the
start is essential.
Indications for anaesthesia
• There has been a move away from ‘single operator’ procedures
(cardiologist managing both procedure and sedation simultaneously) to
regular anaesthetic support, with the aim of improving safety, efficiency
and efficacy.
• Ablation procedures are facilitated by GA as this provides an immobile
patient and ventilation control.
• Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) avoids operative aortic
valve replacement (AVR) and is done under either LA or GA in the
cath lab.
• Angioplasties can be done under LA, but sedation may be required for
patients agitated after out- of- hospital cardiac arrest.
• Cardioversions usually require just a brief face mask GA. Airway control
may be needed for TOE for atrial clot.
• While some permanent pacemakers and devices can be inserted under
LA (± minimal sedation), subpectoral chest wall insertion sites require
GA. Wire removal always requires a GA as these procedures can be
lengthy and complicated, with a risk of significant blood loss.
• Otherwise fit and well patients for electrophysiology studies may prefer
a GA.
Anaesthesia: general points
• Choice of sedation or GA and the type of GA depends upon the needs
of the patient and the nature of the procedure. patients range from
fit, well and coming in from home to those unwell on the coronary
care unit, those septic from infected devices and those with critical AS
deemed unsuitable for cardiac surgery.
• Before starting, check you have all the drugs drawn up that
you anticipate using for anaesthesia and those you may want in
an emergency (such as metaraminol, ephedrine, atropine and
suxamethonium). Access to opioids or muscle relaxants can be delayed
by your remote location.
• GAs may require several infusion pumps. Other equipment such as
depth of anaesthesia monitoring or a jet ventilator (e.g. for atrial
ablations) may be required and are likely to be stored centrally.
• Check the anaesthetic machine and suction and that monitoring is
available, and consider the positioning with respect to both during
induction of anaesthesia and afterwards. Consider the path of the C-
arm and location of electrophysiology screens, defibrillator trolley, drip
stands and pumps and also your own location in relation to this.
• Close monitoring and access to the patient will need to be balanced
against operator access and your own radiation safety. A lead apron and
thyroid screen is mandatory and regular visitors to the cath lab should
wear a radiation monitoring device.


## 頁面 848

AnAESThESIA FOR CARDIOLOGY pROCEDURES 827
• Induction of the patient is most easily performed in the lab itself, but
this comes with noise and distraction—b e prepared to manage this.
Make sure there is good access to the patient’s airway, your drug and
airway trolleys and anaesthetic machine when inducing anaesthesia on
the procedure table. Move the C- arm out of the way, if possible.
• In some situations (difficult airway, risk of regurgitation, morbid
obesity), it may be better to induce the patient on a trolley or bed to
allow for a more head- up position or the ability to tilt the trolley.
• Maintaining normothermia can be challenging— use a fluid warmer and
an underbody forced air warming device.
• Many patients are anticoagulated. For those who are not (or have
had their anticoagulation reversed for the procedure), remember to
consider VTE prophylaxis such as calf pumps.
• Ensure recovery facilities are available with an appropriately equipped
recovery bay and experienced recovery nurses. In some situations, it
may be necessary to transfer the patient to a theatre recovery area.
• Some patients will need to remain monitored on the cardiology ward
overnight. The need to apply compression to groin access sites may
limit the degree of head-u p positioning in the early postoperative
period.
• In the event of unexpectedly prolonged and complicated procedures,
maintain contact with colleagues in theatres such as the duty
anaesthetist or the on- call anaesthetic team. Breaks, advice and/o r
immediate help may be required. Anaesthetic activities running over
time in remote sites can be easily overlooked.


## 頁面 849

828
828 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for cardioversion
• Cardioversions can be elective or emergency and the former are most
likely to be performed in the cath lab.
• Despite coming in from home, and therefore being relatively stable,
patients often have documented poor ventricular function that has been
worsened by their dysrhythmia. Other comorbidities are common.
patients are usually day case and in AF.
• A single synchronised shock is usual (maximum of three).
• Check anticoagulant compliance or adequacy of InR.
• May need definitive airway management for associated TOE (used to
check if suspicion of atrial appendage clot), otherwise position head-u p
with face mask and preoxygenation. have a backup airway management
plan prepared.
• propofol ± midazolam are usually sufficient for a face mask GA.
Although cardioversion is very stimulating, it rarely requires
opioids afterwards. Atropine may be needed for sinus bradycardia
post- cardioversion.
• placing pads front to back is most effective, especially in the obese or
if previous repeated shocks. Consider in situ devices (e.g. permanent
pacemakers) when placing pads.
• Before commencing anaesthesia, check the team is ready and discuss
defibrillator safety; the operator may be anyone from a cardiology
specialist nurse practitioner to an inexperienced junior doctor.
• If the patient has an ICD in situ, an electrophysiologist should be
present. The device may be used to perform the shock; however, the
battery drainage outweighs the potential risk of damage to the ICD, so
an external defibrillator is preferred.
• Emergency cardioversions can be for atrial or ventricular dysrhythmias
and performed anywhere in the hospital, depending on urgency.
Unstable patients in the resuscitation bay will need very little in the way
of sedation; unfasted patients may need RSI if high risk.
• Even in cases of urgency, skilled airway assistance for the anaesthetist
must be available and all drugs and equipment should be checked.


## 頁面 850

AnAESThESIA FOR AnGIOGRAphY 829
Anaesthesia for angiography
Angiograms and angioplasty are most commonly performed under LA by
the cardiologist, but some situations require a GA or sedation from the
anaesthetist.
• Elective and urgent ward angiography patients will usually have their
procedure under LA ± minimal sedation from the cardiologist.
• patients who have survived an out- of- hospital cardiac arrest may need
emergency angiography and revascularisation. They can be unstable but
distressed and agitated, needing careful sedation. Aim for avoidance
of further cardiorespiratory disruption or loss of consciousness, but
prepare for the possibility of airway intervention and vasopressor/
inotropic support. These patients will go to the coronary care unit post-
procedure if stable enough.
• Unresponsive patients will need intubation and ventilation and transfer
to ICU post- procedure. Conversely, patients already admitted to ICU
after an arrest may require transfer to the lab for investigation.
• Challenges involve an unfamiliar environment and team, alongside the
time pressures for revascularisation.
• Good communication between the anaesthetist and the cardiologist
is essential to balance the need for safe patient monitoring against
swift intervention and avoid risks such as exposure to radiation of a
distracted anaesthetic team.
• Good venous access needs to remain easily accessible to the
anaesthetist and if the patient is awake and agitated, they will need to
hear reassurance. A plan and equipment for airway management must
be in place if they are not already intubated. There should be dedicated
skilled airway assistance available.


## 頁面 851

830
830 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for cardiac device insertion
and removal
• Devices may be permanent pacemakers, ICDs or have a combined
function. Cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT) devices have three
venous leads to mimic normal physiology while pacing and can be CRT-
p (pacemaker) or CRT- D (defibrillator).
• S- ICD pacemakers are extravascular (subcutaneous) and placed in the
chest wall between the serratus anterior and the latissimus dorsi, with
tunnelling of leads towards the sternum.
• ICDs are placed in patients who are at risk of sudden death due to
malignant cardiac arrhythmias. patients range from young and otherwise
fit adults with normal cardiac contractility to extremely compromised
cardiac patients.
• Device insertion can be under LA alone or LA with sedation from the
cardiologist, LA with deeper sedation (such as propofol TCI) from the
anaesthetist, or GA.
• Fluoroscopy/X - rays will be used and so radiation protection is
mandatory.
• Relevant factors to consider in anaesthetic planning are: indication,
cardiac function, procedure requirements and duration and patient
preference (Table 34.1).
Device insertion
• pacemakers and ICDs that are not being tested are usually inserted
by the cardiologist in the pacing lab under LA without the need for
anaesthetic support.
• ICD insertion can be for 1° or 2° prevention and the latter group of
patients are likely to have greater comorbidity.
• If the ICD requires testing (e.g. for patients with hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy, complex anatomy or right-s ided devices),
this necessitates either deep sedation or a GA.
Table 34.1 procedures and appropriate anaesthetic
Procedure GA/ LA/ airway Note
permanent pacemaker LA ± sedation Usually by cardiologist
insertion
ICD insertion LA ± sedation Can be 1° or 2° prevention
ICD insertion GA (LMA/ ETT) If device test planned.
Arterial line
S- ICD insertion GA (with LA infiltration) ± regional blockade
CRT insertion GA or LA + sedation poor ventricular function
permanent pacemaker LA ± sedation GA if deep/ wound revision
box change
Lead/ system extraction GA (ETT) May be infected. Risk of
major haemorrhage


## 頁面 852

AnAESThESIA FOR CARDIAC DEVICE InSERTIOn AnD REMOVAL 831
• If the device implantation is likely to be more stimulating than usual
(sited in a deeper location, e.g. subpectoral or within chest wall S-
ICDs), a GA is indicated.
• Chest wall regional blockade could be considered (instead of GA)
for the insertion of SC ICDs in high- risk grown- up congenital heart
(GUCh) patients.
• Insertion of devices for CRT can take longer and need anaesthetic
support. These patients will, by definition, have more comorbidities and
be at higher risk.
• prophylactic antibiotics are given for device insertion.
Device extraction
• Devices/ systems are usually extracted for infection, lead migration or
breakage. Box changes alone should be relatively straightforward, but
lead extraction can be high risk, depending on the number and location
of leads, duration in situ and likely degree of scarring and extraction
difficulty.
• In all lead extraction cases, major haemorrhage should be prepared
for and difficult cases should have a cardiac surgeon and cardiac bypass
standing by.
• Although a single- lumen ETT is standard, consider a DLT if very high
concern (e.g. in extractions with a previous midline sternotomy for
access to the SVC and brachiocephalic vein if needed.)
• patients should not be anticoagulated or anaemic, and should have
blood available and large venous access in situ, preferably right- sided.
• Although the cardiologist can gain arterial access femorally at the
start of the procedure, a dedicated radial arterial line can be used for
induction and emergence/ recovery, leaving femoral access free for
bypass intervention.
• Team brief should include discussion of potential adverse events and a
clear plan for what happens should they occur.
• Infected leads and systems will require antibiotics at induction if not
already given, e.g. teicoplanin. patients may be systemically unwell and/
or chronically septic.
• If the system is infected, a new device is not usually inserted
immediately as the infection needs to be treated first, so a temporary
pacing wire may be needed in the interim, depending on the underlying
dysrhythmia. pacing access may be femoral or via the neck veins.


## 頁面 853

832
832 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for electrophysiology
procedures (AF and VT ablation)
With advances in technology, mapping and ablation procedures are be-
coming more frequent. Ablation is now commonly performed as a 2nd-l ine
therapy for both paroxysmal and persistent AF. Ablation can also be per-
formed for atrial flutter and ventricular arrhythmias such as VT. Common
ablation techniques use radiofrequency energy (burning) or cryothermy
(freezing).
Preoperative considerations
• Most patients come in from home on the day and are functionally well,
in either sinus rhythm or rate- controlled AF.
• however, there may be those who have poor cardiac function
destabilised by their dysrhythmia and unstable inpatients with resistant
VT on the coronary care unit.
• While solely right- sided procedures may be day cases, most will require
an inpatient bed overnight.
• Anxious patients may require GA for electrophysiology studies.
Procedural points
• Long procedures (2–4 h) requiring minimal patient movement and/ or
ventilation control mean that GA is preferable.
• The main target for atrial ablation is isolation of the four pulmonary
veins. For persistent AF, left atrial ‘substrate’ ablation may also be
needed, prolonging the procedure.
• RFA requires mapping systems to identify arrhythmia trigger sites
and pathways, necessitating careful positioning of multiple electrodes
by the lab electrophysiologists (usually applied prior to anaesthetic
monitoring).
• There will be ionising radiation used for much of the procedure.
Ventilation and access
• There is respiratory excursion compensation within the mapping
systems, but mechanical ventilation should also be optimised.
• IppV with a low V and high RR can be used throughout or in
T
conjunction with periods of jet ventilation via a jet catheter placed
inside the ETT (Monsoon/ Mistral ventilator, frequency 150, for 30–
60min). Some centres use jet ventilation throughout; however, lung
disease or obesity may limit this. Use a TIVA anaesthetic with EEG/B IS®
monitoring if jet ventilation is used.
• Only a large accessible peripheral access is required for simple atrial
ablation, unless other patient comorbidities make an arterial line
advisable.
• Ventricular ablations usually require an arterial line either at induction
or prior to the procedure. The cardiologist can gain arterial access (and
central venous, if needed) in the groin and a pressure waveform can be
slaved from this.


## 頁面 854

AnAESThESIA FOR ELECTROphYSIOLOGY pROCEDURES 833
Other considerations
• The procedure table is narrow and does not tip or go head up. Table
controls may be distant and unfamiliar—t he radiographer can assist.
patients with a difficult airway or obesity may be better anaesthetised
on a trolley and transferred once asleep.
• Use an ‘underbody’ forced air warmer with temperature monitoring.
• Femoral venous access is used to access the heart; remifentanil infusion
as part of the anaesthetic technique can reduce coughing at extubation
and subsequent groin haematoma.
• Sodium chloride 0.9% irrigation around the ablation catheter tip
results in a significant fluid load (1.5L). Balance with restricted fluids
± vasopressors if needed, as urinary catheterisation is not usually
performed.
• In the cath lab, the WhO sign- in is performed with the whole team.
• Once the patient is asleep, wires, monitors, drip stands and the
anaesthetic machine need to be positioned to avoid the C-a rm and
allow visualisation of the monitor and patient access as required.
During the procedure
• Relatively unstimulating procedure— Bp support may be required.
• TOE can be needed to visualise trans- septal left atrial access when
challenging with fluoroscopy alone.
• heparin is always given for left-s ided procedures, even when the patient
is anticoagulated. ACT target usually >300s and reversed by protamine
at the end; this is usually managed by the cardiologist.
• Induced arrhythmias may cause haemodynamic instability and it can be
necessary to cardiovert the patient during the procedure.
• Isoprenaline and adenosine may be given at the discretion of the
cardiologist towards the end of the procedure and will cause
tachyarrhythmias and brief asystole, respectively.
• Analgesia requirements are minimal— LA at access sites, IV paracetamol
and antiemetics are sufficient.
• An in– out catheter can improve comfort in recovery.
Complications
• Include vascular injury/ pseudoaneurysms/ haematomas/ A– V fistulae
(1:100).
• The cardiologist will routinely perform a TOE at the end of the
procedure to check for tamponade; a sudden unexplained drop in
Bp during the procedure could indicate tamponade and should be
communicated (1:100– 1:200 risk).
• Oesophageal injuries such as perforation or atrio-o esophageal fistula
are serious complications but typically present 7–1 0d post- AF ablation.
• phrenic nerve injury is usually transient and is particularly common
during cryoballoon ablation of AF.
• pericardial effusion (1:100– 1:200).
• CVE (1:250).


## 頁面 855

834
834 ChApTER 34 Anaesthesia for radiology and cardiology
Anaesthesia for transcatheter aortic
valve implantation
• Increasingly common procedure to avoid operative AVR. Initially
performed in high- risk patients (frail/ elderly/ comorbidities), indications
now extending to lower- risk patients.
• Establish extent of appropriate intervention in case of complication, e.g.
suitability for sternotomy/ bypass/ CpR.
• Most commonly performed transfemorally (percutaneous);
alternatively, transapically (mini- thoracotomy) where there are issues
with femoral access. Less common approaches include transaxillary,
transaortic and transcaval.
• Transfemoral approach usually performed under LA with sedation.
• Requires good peripheral access. Arterial and central venous pressures
can be measured from procedural access. Sedation requirements can be
minimal and depend on the individual. prepare patient for intervention
points, i.e. LA infiltration, device insertion and valve deployment.
• Transapical/ transaortic approach— set up as for CpB: arterial line, CVp,
large- bore IV access, urinary catheter, external defibrillator pads.
• Typically TCI for GA (e.g. remifentanil, propofol, relaxant; intubate and
ventilate with O/ air).
2
• have emergency drugs prepared for all TAVI procedures. Consider
noradrenaline infusion to maintain systemic Bp.
• procedure involves rapid atrial pacing to permit valvotomy and
placement of the prosthetic valve— maintain Bp (>100mmhg) before
this starts, and have adrenaline (1:10 000) drawn up, as the heart may
be stunned immediately following this. Ventilation does not need to
stop for valve positioning.
• have hypotensive agents (e.g. esmolol, GTn) available post-v alve
insertion, as hypertension can be marked.
• Analgesia: infiltrate all wounds with LA and give IV paracetamol
for postoperative pain relief; consider paravertebral block for
mini- thoracotomy.
• For the transapical approach: more analgesia is required; blood should
be available in the angiography suite for LV apical ventriculotomy, and
consider cell salvage. Early extubation is ideal.
• Recover supine (femoral access closure), with supplemental O, and
2
recover with full monitoring as for any anaesthetic.
• Be aware of TAVI complications— these include arrhythmia/ heart
block/ tamponade/ rupture/ valve malposition or migration/ coronary
occlusion/ CVE.
Special considerations
• Digoxin increases the risk of arrhythmia— omit on the day.


## 頁面 856

TRAnSCAThETER AORTIC VALVE IMpLAnTATIOn 835
Further reading
Wilson SR, Shinde S, Appleby I, et al. (2019). Guidelines for the safe provision of anaesthesia in
magnetic resonance units 2019. Guidelines from the Association of Anaesthetists and the neuro
Anaesthesia and Critical Care Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Anaesthesia, 74, 638– 50.
Dooley n, Lowe M, Ashley EMC (2018). Advances in management of electrophysiology and atrial
fibrillation in the cardiac catheter laboratory: implications for anaesthesia. BJA Educ, 18, 349– 56.
Levy D, Bigham C, Tomlinson D (2018). Anaesthesia for patients with hereditary arrhythmias part I:
Brugada syndrome. BJA Educ, 18, 159– 65.
Royal College of Radiologists (2018). Sedation, Analgesia and Anaesthesia in Radiology Department,
2nd edn. London: Royal College of Radiologists.
harris p, Lysitsas D (2016). Ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. BJA Educ, 16, 221– 9.
Mavrides E, Allard S, Chandraharan E, et al.; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
(2016). prevention and management of postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG, 124, e106– 49.
Landrigan- Ossar M (2015). Common procedures and strategies for anaesthesia in interventional
radiology. Curr Opin Anesthesiol, 28, 458– 63.
Barnard M, Martin B (2010). Cardiac Anaesthesia (Oxford Specialist handbooks). Oxford: Oxford
University press.
national Institute for health and Care Excellence (2010). Uterine artery embolisation for fibroids.
Interventional procedures guidance [IpG367]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ IpG367
Sweeting CJ, Thomas pW, Sanders DJ (2002). The long Bain breathing system: an investigation into
the implications of remote ventilation. Anaesthesia, 57, 1183– 6.


## 頁面 857

836

