# 產科麻醉

## Chapter 35: Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 858-919*

---


## 頁面 858

Chapter 35 837
Obstetric anaesthesia and
analgesia
James Eldridge, Nicola Cox, Alisha Allana
and Heidi Lightfoot
Physiology and Breastfeeding and drug
pharmacology 838 transfer 867
Analgesia for labour 840 Retained placenta 869
Central neuraxial blocks for Fetal neuroprotection 870
labour analgesia 841 In utero fetal death 871
The poorly functioning Pregnancy- induced hypertension
epidural 844 and pre- eclampsia 872
Complications of CNB Eclampsia 877
analgesia 845 HELLP syndrome 878
Dural puncture and postdural Massive obstetric
puncture headache 848 haemorrhage 879
Remifentanil for labour Commonly used uterotonics
analgesia 852 and doses 883
Caesarean section 853 Placenta praevia and accreta 884
Caesarean section: epidural 855 Amniotic fluid embolism 886
Caesarean section: spinal 857 Obesity and pregnancy 887
Caesarean section: CSE 858 Maternal sepsis 889
Inadequate anaesthesia 860 Cardiac disease and
Hypotension 861 pregnancy 891
Caesarean section: general Surgery during pregnancy 893
anaesthesia 862 Cervical cerclage (cervical
Failed intubation 864 stitch) 896
Postoperative analgesia 865 Maternal resuscitation 897
Summary of dosing regimes 866
See also
% Obstetric anaesthesia in the patient with a spinal cord injury
pp. 307–8
% Pregnancy and trauma p. 988


## 頁面 859

838
838 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Physiology and pharmacology
From early in the 1st trimester, a woman’s physiology changes under the
influence of increasing progesterone and oestrogen production. The effects
are widespread.
• CO increases by 750%. Diastolic BP falls in early pregnancy and is at
its lowest at 20w gestation, returning to prepregnant levels by term.
Systolic BP follows the same pattern but is less affected. CVP and
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure are not altered.
• CO increases further during labour, peaking immediately post-d elivery.
Preload and afterload change rapidly at delivery. This is a period of high
risk for women with impaired myocardial or valvular function.
• Uteroplacental blood flow is not autoregulated and so is dependent on
uterine artery BP.
• Aortocaval occlusion occurs when the gravid uterus rests on the aorta
or the IVC. Near term, complete caval occlusion in the supine position
is almost universal. Most women have sufficient collateral circulation,
so only 10% develop overt supine hypotensive syndrome. Even if
normotensive, placental blood supply may be compromised in the
supine position. After the 20th week of gestation, a left lateral tilt or
uterine displacement should be employed. If either mother or fetus is
symptomatic, the tilt should be increased.
• Plasma volume increases by 50% by term while red cell mass only
increases by 30%, resulting in physiological anaemia of pregnancy.
• Pregnant women become hypercoagulable early in the 1st trimester
and it is at this time deaths from PE occur most commonly. Plasma
concentrations of factors I (fibrinogen), VII, VIII, IX, X and XII increase,
but antithrombin III levels decrease. All pregnant women undergoing
surgery should be risk- assessed for thromboprophylaxis.
• PaCO decreases to 74.0kPa (30mmHg) in early pregnancy. FRC
2
decreases by 20% at term, resulting in airway closure in 50% of supine
women. This, combined with a 60% increase in O consumption,
2
renders pregnant women at term vulnerable to hypoxia when supine,
especially if combined with a raised BMI.
• In labour, painful contractions and excessive breathing of Entonox® can
result in further hyperventilation and marked alkalosis may occur. An
arterial pH in excess of 7.5 is common.
• While whole gut transit time is increased in pregnancy, gastric emptying
and acidity are little changed. However, gastric emptying is slowed
in established labour and almost halted by systemic opioids. Barrier
pressure (the difference in pressure between the stomach and the
lower oesophageal ‘sphincter’) is reduced, but the incidence of
regurgitation into the upper oesophagus during anaesthesia in otherwise
asymptomatic individuals is not significantly different in the 1st and 2nd
trimesters
• By 48h postpartum, intra- abdominal pressure, gastric emptying, volume
and acidity are all similar to non- pregnant controls. Lower oesophageal
sphincter tone may take longer to recover, but in the absence of other
indications for intubation, mask anaesthesia is acceptable 48h after
delivery.


## 頁面 860

PHySIOLOgy AND PHARMACOLOgy 839
• Renal blood flow increases by 75% at term and gFR by 50%. Both urea
and creatinine plasma concentrations fall.
• Neurological tissue has a greater susceptibility to the action of LA
during pregnancy and ‘MAC’ is also reduced.
• The volume of distribution increases by 5L, affecting predominantly
polar (water-s oluble) agents. Lipid- soluble drugs are more affected by
changes in protein binding. The fall in albumin concentration increases
the free active portion of acidic agents, while basic drugs are more
dominantly bound to α- 1 glycoprotein. Some specific binding proteins,
such as thyroxine- binding protein, increase in pregnancy.
• Plasma cholinesterase concentration falls by about 25%, but due
to the increased volume of distribution, the duration of action of
suxamethonium is little changed.


## 頁面 861

840
840 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Analgesia for labour
• The three most commonly used analgesics in labour are inhaled NO,
2
opioids and CNB techniques—s pinals, combined spinal/e pidurals
(CSEs) and epidurals.
• For many women, acceptable analgesia in labour does not mean
complete absence of all sensation and there are numerous practices
that can help mothers through labour. These include prepared
childbirth, massage, acupuncture, warm water baths and transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). Although the evidence that these
alter pain scores is weak, they are all useful techniques.
• NO/O (Entonox®) is the most commonly used inhalational agent and
2 2
is possibly more efficacious and safer than a single dose of pethidine.
However, complete analgesia is never attained with it. Entonox® can
induce nausea and presyncope, and with prolonged exposure, NO has
2
adverse effects on the haematological and immunological systems. NO
2
is a greenhouse gas.
• Worldwide, pethidine remains one of the most popular opioids for
labour analgesia. However, it has a long half- life in the fetus (18– 23h),
reduces fetal HR variability, is associated with changes in neonatal
neurobehavioural scores and can affect breastfeeding. If regional
analgesia is contraindicated, a fentanyl or remifentanil PCA may be
more beneficial (see % pp. 1162–3). IM diamorphine is also used in the
UK, although it may prolong labour by over an hour.
• CNB analgesia remains the most effective form of analgesia.
• Uterine pain is transmitted in sensory fibres which accompany the
sympathetic supply to T10– L1, while vaginal pain is transmitted via the
pudendal nerve to S2– S4 nerve roots. Paracervical and pudendal nerve
blocks can block the pain of labour, but CNB techniques are more
effective and have largely replaced them.
• CNB techniques can be expected to provide effective analgesia in
over 85% of women. CNB analgesia is associated with hypotension, i
oxytocin use and i incidence of maternal pyrexia, but is not associated
with an increase in CS rates. With low concentrations of epidural LA
(i.e. ≤0.1% bupivacaine), there is no increase in the instrumental delivery
rate. Fetal umbilical pH is marginally improved with epidural analgesia.
• Using ‘low- dose’ epidural techniques can reduce the incidence of
hypotension and motor blockade and increase maternal satisfaction.
The instrumental delivery rate can be reduced by:
• Decreasing the total dose of LA administered by establishing, as well
as maintaining, CNB analgesia with low- dose LA and opioid
• Using patient- controlled epidural analgesia (PCEA) or intermittent
top- ups to maintain analgesia. In general, infusions deliver a greater
total dose of LA than intermittent top- ups, while PCEA delivers the
smallest total dose.


## 頁面 862

CENTRAL NEURAXIAL BLOCKS FOR LABOUR ANAL gESIA 841
Central neuraxial blocks for labour
analgesia
See also % pp. 1114–17.
Indications
• Maternal request.
• Expectation of operative delivery.
• Conditions which might make gA difficult or life- threatening (e.g.
morbid obesity, difficult airway).
• Maternal comorbidities, in particular those where sympathetic
stimulation might cause maternal or fetal deterioration, specific CVS
disease (e.g. regurgitant valvular lesions), severe respiratory disease
(e.g. CF), specific neurological disease (e.g. intracranial AVMs, spinal
cord injury) and some obstetric disease (e.g. pre-e clampsia without
coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia).
Absolute contraindications
• Maternal refusal or allergy.
• Local infection or severe systemic sepsis.
• Uncorrected hypovolaemia or uncontrolled haemorrhage.
• Coagulopathy: expert opinion on precise values when CNB cannot
be used varies; always consider risk and benefit for individual patients.
Spinal analgesia is probably safer than epidural analgesia. generally, in
the absence of pharmacological agents that affect clotting, a platelet
count >75 × 109/ L with a normal clotting screen is considered safe.
However, a slightly lower platelet count may be acceptable in patients at
high risk from gA. Tests of coagulation and platelet count should usually
be within 6h of the procedure, but also consider the rate at which the
platelet count is falling. The AoA guidelines can be accessed online.1
• Raised ICP (excluding the majority of individuals with communicating
idiopathic intracranial hypertension).
Relative contraindications
• Expectation of significant haemorrhage.
• Untreated systemic infection.
• Specific cardiac disease (e.g. severe valvular stenosis, Eisenmenger’s
syndrome, peripartum cardiomyopathy).
• Previous back surgery with scarring of the epidural space may cause
difficulty in placement of an epidural, increase the risk of a dural
puncture and may reduce the analgesic efficacy. Intrathecal techniques
would be expected to work normally.
Consent
Most UK anaesthetists do not take written consent before inserting an epi-
dural for labour analgesia, but an ‘appropriate’ explanation must be given.
Many women do not accurately recall information given in labour. The ex-
planation and all the adverse effects discussed should be documented. The
Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association has produced an information website
and card for mothers, available in multiple languages, which includes a quan-
titative estimate of the incidence of a variety of potential complications,
including neurological injury (M https:// www.labourpains.com).


## 頁面 863

842
842 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Epidural analgesia for labour
• Make sure a trained midwife is available to provide one-t o- one care.
• Establish IV access. In the absence of previous haemorrhage or dehydration,
when low-d ose LA techniques are used, fluid loading is unnecessary.
• Sterile technique: mask, hat, gown and gloves should be worn.
• Position either in full lateral or sitting (finding the midline may be easier
when sitting).
• Record fetal HR before and during the establishment of analgesia.
• Skin sterilisation with 0.5% chlorhexidine is common in the UK. Most
sterilising solutions, including chlorhexidine, are neurotoxic. Avoid
contamination of the CNB equipment or the anaesthetist’s gloves. It is
sensible to complete skin sterilisation before the neuraxial equipment
is unwrapped. Chlorhexidine must be allowed to dry before the skin is
touched.
• Locate the epidural space using a Tuohy needle. Loss of resistance to
0.9% sodium chloride may slightly reduce the incidence of accidental
dural puncture and ‘missed segments’ when compared to loss of
resistance to air.
• The chance of puncturing a vessel with the catheter is reduced if 10mL
of 0.9% sodium chloride is flushed into the epidural space before
inserting the catheter. Warn about discomfort when threading the
catheter.
• Leave 3.5– 5cm of catheter in the epidural space; longer increases risk
of unilateral block and shorter increases risk of catheter pulling out of
the epidural space.
• Aspirate the catheter to check for blood or CSF. If blood is aspirated,
withdraw the catheter, leaving a minimum of 3cm in the space. If blood
is still present, remove the catheter and reinsert.
• give a test dose. The dose should be sufficient to produce a
significant but not dangerously high block within 5min if the catheter
is unexpectedly in CSF. Testing for IV placement of the catheter using
1:200 000 adrenaline has both high false positive and negative rates.
Many anaesthetists will use 8mL of 0.1% bupivacaine with a dilute
opioid (2 micrograms/ mL fentanyl) as the test dose.
• After 5min, load with further (dilute) LA to establish analgesia (12mL of
0.1% bupivacaine with 2 micrograms/ mL fentanyl).
• The complete absence of a detectable block after a loading dose should
raise the suspicion of a malpositioned catheter. Remember ‘every dose
is a test dose’!
• Measure BP every 5min for at least 20min after every bolus dose.
• Epidural analgesia can be maintained by one of four methods:
• PCEA. A variety of regimens have been proposed. In general, larger
volumes of low- concentration bupivacaine with opioid produce more
effective analgesia, e.g. 5– 10mL boluses of 0.1% bupivacaine with 2
micrograms/ mL fentanyl and a 15– 20min lockout period.
• A continuous infusion of LA (5– 12mL/h of 0.1% bupivacaine with 2
micrograms/ mL fentanyl).
• Intermittent top- ups of LA administered by midwife (rare in the
UK— superseded by PCEA).
• Programmed intermittent epidural boluses. These have a reduced
risk of breakthrough pain compared to continuous infusions, without
increasing the risk of an instrumental delivery.


## 頁面 864

CENTRAL NEURAXIAL BLOCKS FOR LABOUR ANAL gESIA 843
Combined spinal/e pidural analgesia for labour
• Low- dose subarachnoid LA and/ or opioid, together with subsequent
top- ups of weak epidural LA, produces rapid onset of analgesia with
minimal motor block (10– 15min quicker than epidural alone).
• CSEs can be advantageous when re- establishing analgesia for women
who have had a failed epidural or for women who are so distressed by
pain that they are unable to remain still while an epidural is sited. They
are used routinely in some centres.
• There is some evidence of improved epidural analgesia after the initial
spinal analgesia has receded.
CSEs can be performed as a needle-t hrough- needle technique or as sep-
arate injections in the same or different intervertebral spaces.
Needle- through- needle
• Locate epidural space at the L3/4 interspace or below, with a Tuohy
needle. The level of the iliac crests usually corresponds to the spinous
process of L4 (Tuffier’s line), although there is variation between
individuals. Pass a 25– 27g pencil-p oint needle through the Tuohy
needle to locate the subarachnoid space and inject subarachnoid
solution (e.g. 0.5– 1.0mL of 0.25% bupivacaine with 5– 25 micrograms
fentanyl).
• Without rotating the epidural needle, insert an epidural catheter.
Separate injection technique
• Perform spinal at L3/ 4. Inject subarachnoid solution (e.g. 0.5– 1.0mL of
0.25% bupivacaine with 5– 25 micrograms fentanyl).
• Insert an epidural catheter at a different interspace.
• This technique is particularly helpful when women are too distressed
to cooperate. Once spinal analgesia is established, an epidural can be
performed with a more compliant patient.
After 15min, check the sensory and motor block and then give the epidural
test dose. If the epidural has been unintentionally sited intrathecally, the
block will change significantly within 5min.
Continue maintenance as per epidural analgesia alone (see % pp. 855–6).
Dural puncture epidural
The dural puncture epidural is a modification of the combined spinal epi-
dural.2 A dural puncture is performed with a 25g (not 27g) pencil-p oint
needle. No intrathecal agents are injected and then an epidural is inserted
and run in the usual fashion. The analgesia obtained is slightly quicker in
onset than a standard epidural and the quality of analgesia is slightly better.
This is probably a result of epidural solution leaking into the CSF through
the hole created by the 25g needle. The incidence of maternal hypoten-
sion, pruritus and uterine hyperstimulation is lower than with a CSE.


## 頁面 865

844
844 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
The poorly functioning epidural
Look for the pattern of failure (Table 35.1). Remember that a full bladder
may cause breakthrough pain. It is important to be confident that the epi-
dural could be topped up for a CS if required. Therefore, if in doubt, resite
the epidural. (See also % p. 1164.)
Table 35.1 Solutions for the poorly functioning epidural
Pattern of failure Remedy
No detectable block despite at least Resite epidural
10mL of 0.25% bupivacaine (or
equivalent)
Unilateral block 1. Top up in a lateral position, with
Assess the block: the painful side down. Use dilute,
Are both feet symmetrically warm large- volume LA and opiate (this
and dry? is usually more effective than
high- concentration, low- volume
Is the pattern of sensory blockade
solutions)
consistent with where the pain is felt?
2. Withdraw the catheter 2– 3cm and
give a further top- up
3. Resite epidural
Missed segment 1. Top up with opioid (i.e. 50– 100
True missed segments are rare. micrograms fentanyl). The
Commonly, a ‘missed segment’ felt in intrathecal mode of action will
the groin is a partial unilateral block minimise segmental effects
2. Continue as per ‘unilateral block’
Back pain 1. Top up with more LA and opioid.
Often associated with an occipito- To achieve a sufficiently dense
posterior position of the fetus and block, higher concentration of LA is
may require a dense block to establish occasionally required
analgesia
Perineal pain 1. Check sacral block and that the
bladder is empty
2. Top up with more LA in sitting
position
3. Continue as per unilateral block


## 頁面 866

COMPLICATIONS OF CNB ANALgESIA 845
Complications of CNB analgesia
Around 25% of labouring women in the UK receive epidural analgesia, and
the obstetric population as a whole account for 45% of all CNBs. Long-
term complications after CNB occur less frequently in the obstetric popu-
lation than in the general population, probably because the duration of
epidural analgesia is relatively short and the population is generally healthy
and younger.3
Hypotension
Hypotension is common after CNB anaesthesia, but less so after CNB an-
algesia. Aim to maintain systolic BP >90% of baseline. Uterine blood flow
is not autoregulated, so prolonged or severe hypotension will cause fetal
compromise. Fluid loading is not routinely required when using low doses
of LA, but if hypovolaemia is suspected, this should be corrected before
starting CNB analgesia.
If hypotension occurs, treat quickly:
• Position patient fully laterally or sitting up. Avoid aortocaval occlusion.
• give an IV fluid bolus of crystalloid solution.
• give vasopressor (e.g. 6mg IV ephedrine) and repeat as necessary.
• If fetal distress occurs, call obstetrician. Consider O via face mask.
2
Remember that brachial artery pressure may not reflect uterine artery
blood flow. If fetal distress is detected and is chronologically related to a
CNB procedure, treat as above, even in the absence of overt hypotension.
Subdural block
Subdural block occurs when the epidural catheter is misplaced between the
dura mater and the arachnoid mater. In obstetric practice, the incidence of
clinically recognised subdural block is <1:1000 epidurals. However, subdural
blocks may be clinically indistinguishable from epidural blocks. Definitive
diagnosis is radiological. The classical characteristics of a subdural block are:
• A slow onset (20–3 0min) of a block that is inappropriately extensive
for the volume of LA injected. The block may extend to the cervical
dermatomes and a Horner’s syndrome may develop.
• The block is often patchy and asymmetrical. Sparing of motor fibres to
the lower limbs may occur.
• A total spinal may occur with top- up doses. This is probably due to an
increase in volume causing the arachnoid mater to rupture.
If a subdural placement is suspected, resite the epidural catheter.
Total spinal
Total spinals are the commonest cause of maternal cardiac arrest in UK
delivery suites. The incidence of unexpectedly high blocks or total spinal
is variously reported to be between 1:100 to 1:100 000 CNBs, depending
on definition. Symptoms and signs are usually immediate, although delayed
onset may occur, possibly caused by a change in maternal position or a
subdural catheter placement. Spinal blocks performed in the presence of a
partially functioning epidural block have a high risk of causing unexpectedly
high blocks or a total spinal.


## 頁面 867

846
846 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
The onset of a total spinal usually follows a sequence of initial difficulty
in coughing (commonly seen during CNB anaesthesia for CS), then loss of
hand and arm strength, followed by difficulty with talking, breathing and
swallowing, then loss of consciousness.
If a block is rising abnormally rapidly, think about the likely cause:
• If the high block followed a subarachnoid injection of hyperbaric LA
(e.g. most spinals), or followed an excess dose into a correctly sited
epidural catheter, position the patient head up.
• If the high block followed either an intentional or an unintentional
injection of plain LA into the subarachnoid space (e.g. with an
unrecognised spinal catheter, rather than an epidural catheter), remember
that plain LA is hypobaric compared to CSF, so a head-u p position may
encourage the block to spread further. gently position the mother in
a left lateral position to minimise dural compression through epidural
vein engorgement (which occurs with caval occlusion) and observe very
closely. Sudden movements may cause CSF to move further cephalad.
• Make sure that the equipment for ventilatory and cardiovascular
support are immediately available. Respiratory paralysis, cardiovascular
depression, unconsciousness and fixed, dilated pupils may ensue.
• Call for help and follow the ABC approach. Maintain airway and
ventilation; avoid aortocaval compression and provide CVS support.
• Even if consciousness is not lost, intubation may be required to protect
the airway. A reduced induction dose is often necessary.
• Careful maternal and fetal monitoring is essential and, if appropriate,
delivery of the fetus. In the absence of fetal distress, CS is not an
immediate requirement.
• Ventilation is usually needed for 1– 2h until the block recedes. Before
extubation, check the patient has good handgrip strength.
Accidental IV injection of local anaesthetic
At the time of siting, 5% of epidurals catheters are completely or partially in
a blood vessel. While these are usually detected and corrected, remember
that ‘every dose is a test dose’. The maxim is to avoid injecting any single
large bolus of LA intravenously.
• Always checking for blood in the catheter
• Always being alert to symptoms of IV injection with every dose of LA,
even when previous doses were uncomplicated
• Dividing all large doses of LA into small aliquots
• Using appropriate LAs
• Maintaining vigilance for incorrect connection of IVIs to epidural
catheters. NAP3 reported a higher incidence of epidural to IV
connections in obstetric patients. Using non- interchangeable CNB
connectors (i.e. NRFit® systems) will reduce this risk.
• If neurological or cardiovascular symptoms occur, stop injecting the
LA. Treat according to BLS/ ALS protocols and administer 20% lipid
emulsion (see % pp. 1092–3).


## 頁面 868

COMPLICATIONS OF CNB ANALgESIA 847
Neurological damage
• Neurological sequelae following delivery under gA is as common as
delivery under CNB anaesthesia, suggesting that obstetric causes from
nerve compression (e.g. pressure from fetal head, prolonged labour or
poor maternal positioning) are probably more common than any effects
from the CNB technique.
• Direct nerve root damage may be associated with pain on insertion
of a CNB. Temporary neurological deficits occur in roughly 1:3000
procedures. Prolonged neurological deficit is much rarer (71:15 000)
and permanent major neurological damage probably occurs in
<1:80 000 CNBs in the obstetric population.
• Neurological damage from potentially reversible causes, such as
infection (e.g. vertebral canal abscess), ischaemia or haemorrhage (e.g.
subdural haematoma), may be immediate or delayed.
• It is unusual to have a dense motor block (an inability to straight leg
raise) in the context of low- concentration LA epidural infusions or
if >4h have passed since the last high dose of spinal or epidural LA.
Immediate anaesthetic review is indicated.
• If an epidural haematoma is suspected and an epidural catheter is in situ,
this should remain until the diagnosis has been excluded as removal may
worsen potential bleeding. Removal of epidural catheters in any patient
should be done with consideration of coagulation status.
• Symptoms from a vertebral canal abscess can occur anytime between a
few days to several months after the CNB procedure. Diagnosis can be
difficult, with fever, back pain, neurological deficit and signs of localised
infection variably present. A high index of suspicion is required.
• Reversibility is time- critical. Depending on the context, urgent MRI with
neurosurgical review and/ or nerve conduction studies may be required.
Dural puncture and postdural puncture headache
(See % pp. 848–51.)


## 頁面 869

848
848 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Dural puncture and postdural puncture
headache
• When loss of CSF through a dural tear is greater than production,
CSF pressure falls and the brain sinks, stretching the meninges.
This stretching is thought to cause headache, sometimes with neck
stiffness and cranial nerve involvement. Compensatory vasodilation of
intracranial vessels may further worsen symptoms.
• Dural puncture may be intentional (as in CSE or spinal anaesthesia) or
unintentional (as a complication of an epidural), and both may cause
headache. Inadvertent dural puncture should occur in <1% of epidurals,
although up to 40% of inadvertent dural punctures may not be
recognised at the time of the procedure. If a dural puncture occurs with
a 16g Tuohy needle, the incidence of postdural puncture headache
(PDPH) is >50%.
• The risk of PDPH following spinal anaesthesia with a 25g pencil-p oint
needle is 2– 10%. These headaches are usually mild, self- limiting and
often not recognised. The incidence of severe headache requiring blood
patching is 71:650. Symptoms may not develop for several days.
• All midwives, as well as obstetric and anaesthetic staff, should be alert
to the signs of PDPH, as symptoms may not develop for several days.
If untreated, headaches are not only unpleasant but, very rarely, can
be life- threatening. Intracranial haemorrhage, subdural haematoma,
cerebral venous thrombosis and coning of the brainstem have all been
reported.
Management of accidental dural puncture can be divided into immediate
management of an inadvertent dural puncture and late management if a
PDPH develops.
Immediate management of inadvertent dural puncture
The aim is to achieve effective analgesia without further complication. If
a dural puncture occurs, a catheter can be either threaded and left in situ
(now an intrathecal catheter) or removed and an epidural catheter rein-
serted. Both techniques are described below. The patient should be in-
formed at the earliest opportunity that a dural puncture has occurred and
of the likely sequelae. All patients at risk of developing a PDPH should be
reviewed daily by an anaesthetist until resolution.
Intrathecal catheter technique
• After a dural puncture, do not move the Tuohy needle. Pass 2–3 cm of
catheter into the subarachnoid space.
• Label the catheter clearly as an intrathecal catheter and only allow
anaesthetists to perform top- ups.
• give through the catheter intermittent top-u ps of 1.0– 2.5mg
bupivacaine ± 5– 25 micrograms fentanyl. Tachyphylaxis may occur
with prolonged labour. Make sure that the dead space of the catheter
and filter is known and accounted for (usually 71.1mL). The dead space
can either be left with a known solution within it or flushed with the
appropriate volume of 0.9% sodium chloride after each top-u p.
• Communicate and document which technique is being used.


## 頁面 870

DURAL PUNCTURE AND POSTDURAL PUNCTURE HEADACHE 849
The principle advantage of this technique is that the chance of per-
forming another dural puncture is removed. Also, the need for epidural
blood patch (although not the incidence of PDPH) may be reduced. While
the quality of analgesia may be excellent, unfamiliarity with dosing, tachy-
phylaxis and movement of the intrathecal catheter out of the intrathecal
space may compromise this.
The greatest risk of this technique is that the catheter may be mistaken
for an epidural catheter.
Removal of the Tuohy needle/ epidural catheter
• Reinsert the epidural at a different interspace, usually one space higher.
Consider asking a senior colleague to help.
• Run the epidural as normal, but beware of intrathecal spread of LA
causing high blocks.
• All top- ups should be given cautiously by an anaesthetist.
Beware... that when large top- ups are given for an operative procedure,
intrathecal spread through the dural tear can result in an unexpectedly
high block.
Late management of postdural puncture headache
Headaches in the postnatal period are common and other causes of head-
aches should be considered (dehydration, tiredness, migraines, anaemia,
meningitis, SAH, venous sinus thrombosis, pituitary bleeds). Common fea-
tures of a PDPH include:
• A history of a dural puncture (although in one- third of PDPHs following
epidural analgesia, the original dural puncture was not recognised at the
time of insertion).
• Onset 24– 48h postdural puncture but can be up to 5d. Untreated, they
are said to last 7– 14d, but the evidence is poor.
• Headache made worse by standing. Headache is often absent after
overnight bed rest but returns after mobilising. However, 5% of PDPHs
are not postural.4
• The headache is usually fronto- occipital and may be associated with
neck stiffness and muffled hearing.
• The headache may be relieved by tight abdominal compression which
can be useful diagnostically.
• Photophobia and difficulty in accommodation are common. Hearing
loss, tinnitus and CN VI nerve palsy with diplopia are possible. If these
signs develop, women should be encouraged to have a blood patch
as these are an indication of a more severe headache and the nerve
injuries may not recover if the dural puncture is not treated promptly.
Treatment is either conservative, alleviating symptoms while waiting for the
dural tear to heal, or actively attempting to ‘seal’ the puncture. Epidural
blood patching is the only commonly used method of sealing dural tears,
although neurosurgical closure has been performed.
Prophylactic treatment
There is a high incidence of bacteraemia shortly after delivery. This, com-
bined with poor efficacy, means that prophylactic blood patching has fallen
out of favour.


## 頁面 871

850
850 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Symptomatic treatment
• Bed rest alleviates symptoms, but the effect is usually transient
and increases the risk of VTE. If immobile for ≥24h, consider VTE
prophylaxis (time LMWH doses to avoid delaying blood patch if
needed).
• Adequate fluid intake (usually oral) should be encouraged, although
there is no evidence that hydration reduces the incidence of PDPH.
Excessive fluid intake may be harmful.
• Simple analgesics are the mainstays of symptomatic treatment. They
should always be offered, even though they are unlikely to completely
relieve a PDPH.
• Caffeine reduces intracranial vasodilation which is partially responsible
for the headache. There is limited evidence that the severity of PDPH
is reduced and some concern that seizures may be increased with high-
dose caffeine. A maximum of 900mg of caffeine is recommended per
day, reduced to 200mg if breastfeeding. A high- energy drink or coffee
contains 7150mg of caffeine.
• There is insufficient evidence currently to recommend routine use of
any of the following: sphenopalatine ganglion block, greater occipital
nerve blocks, theophylline, ACTH analogues, steroids, triptans,
gabapentin, acupuncture, epidural opioid or fluid.4
• Definitive treatment is with epidural blood patching.
Epidural blood patch
Only a third of postpartum women with PDPH will have complete reso-
lution of symptoms after an epidural blood patch, although 50–8 0% will re-
port some benefit. Relapse can occur and the need for a 2nd blood patch is
common.5 Lower success rates occur if blood patches are performed <48h
after the dural puncture.
The proposed mechanism of action of blood patch is twofold—b lood
injected into the epidural space compresses the dural sac and raises the ICP,
which can produce almost instant improvement in pain. Secondly, blood
forming a clot over the dural tear seals the CSF leak and the dural sac grad-
ually refills.
Although serious complications after blood patching are rare, backache
is common— 35% of women experience some discomfort 48h post-p atch
and 16% have prolonged backache (mean duration 27d). Repeated dural
puncture is possible, and neurological deficits, arachnoiditis, infection,
epileptiform fits and cranial nerve damage have all been reported.
Technique
• Written information should be offered to the patient and written
consent obtained. Consent should include reference to the success
rate (as above), and that repeat dural puncture is possible, that back
pain during and for several days after epidural blood patch is common
and that there can be significant and rare complications, including nerve
damage, bleeding and infection.
• The patient should be apyrexial with a normal WCC.
• Two operators are required. One should be an experienced
‘epiduralist’, and the other is required to take blood in a sterile manner.
• The patient may benefit from a period of bed rest before performing
the patch to reduce the CSF volume in the epidural space.


## 頁面 872

DURAL PUNCTURE AND POSTDURAL PUNCTURE HEADACHE 851
• Aseptic technique must be meticulous at both the epidural site and the
site of venepuncture.
• Blood injected into the epidural space predominantly spreads cephalad,
so blood patches should be performed at the same or lower interspace
as the dural puncture, with the woman in the lateral position to
minimise CSF pressure in the lumbar dural sac.
• When the epidural space has been identified, 20mL of blood is
obtained.
• Inject the blood slowly through the epidural needle until either a
maximum of 20mL has been given or pain develops (commonly in
the back or legs). If pain occurs, pause and if the pain resolves, try
continuing a slow injection. If the pain recurs, then stop.
• Maintain bed rest for 2h to allow a clot to form.
• As far as possible, the patient should avoid straining, lifting or excessive
bending for 48h.
• Follow- up is still required and every woman should have clear
instructions to contact the anaesthetists again if symptoms recur.


## 頁面 873

852
852 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Remifentanil for labour analgesia
Remifentanil is an ultrashort- acting, potent mu- agonist synthetic opioid,
which is broken down by non-s pecific tissue and plasma esterases. It
has a half- life of about 6min and a rapid onset time of 30– 60s. Although
remifentanil readily crosses the placenta, it is also rapidly metabolised in
the fetus. These features make remifentanil a useful analgesic agent in la-
bour.6 Like all opioids, it does not produce complete analgesia but is more
effective than IM pethidine. Although its analgesic effect may be similar
to fentanyl PCA, remifentanil is associated with a decreased requirement
for fetal resuscitation, but an increased incidence of maternal respiratory
depression (5– 93%). Remifentanil should only be used with direct (in the
room) supervision. There have been numerous case reports of maternal
respiratory arrests.
As there is a significant risk of respiratory depression, a training pro-
gramme for all midwifery and anaesthetic staff must be completed before
remifentanil is introduced to a labour ward.
The ideal PCA regimen has not been established. Many proposed tech-
niques are based on body weight, but the technique below is based on a
fixed dose which has the advantage of simplicity and hence safety.
Technique
• Of critical importance is establishing one-t o- one care with a trained
individual (midwife) who must be continuously present in the room.
• No opioid should have been used in the previous 4h.
• Establish dedicated IV access.
• PCA bolus dose of 20– 40 micrograms and lockout of 2min.
• Monitor with continuous SpO.
2
• give O if SpO <94% on air.
2 2
• Thirty- minute observations of RR, sedation score and pain scores.
• Always flush the cannula when a PCA is discontinued.
• Call the anaesthetist if:
• The patient is not rousable to voice
• RR <8 breaths/ min
• SpO <94% despite O supplementation.
2 2


## 頁面 874

CAESAREAN SECTION 853
Caesarean section
With all CS, it is vital that the obstetrician clearly communicates the degree
of urgency to all staff. The classification in Table 35.2 is a modification of
that originally proposed by Lucas.
Table 35.2 Categories of urgency of Caesarean section
Category 1 Maternal or fetal compromise with immediate threat to the life
of mother or fetus
Category 2 Maternal or fetal compromise that is not immediately
life- threatening
Category 3 No maternal or fetal compromise but requires early delivery
Category 4 No maternal or fetal compromise. Delivery timed to suit
mother and maternity services
• Any emergency CS requires transfer of the patient to theatre as rapidly
as possible. Fetal monitoring should be continued until abdominal skin
preparation starts.
• Category 1 CS: aim to deliver the fetus as quickly as possible while
not compromising maternal safety. While it is the obstetrician’s
responsibility to call the urgency of the CS, it is the anaesthetist’s
responsibility to choose a method of anaesthesia that is safe. While in
many centres, gA is common for Category 1 sections, CNB anaesthesia
is a valid alternative. Do not be pressured into choosing a form of
anaesthesia that is inappropriate for the mother.
• Category 2– 4 CS: usually performed under CNB anaesthesia.
• Remember that the classification of urgency should be continuously
reviewed. Category 1 sections can become Category 2, and vice versa.
• Remember to document the following times: time informed, time into
theatre, time anaesthetic was ready, time of knife to skin and time of
delivery.
Central neuraxial blockade for Caesarean section
(See also % pp. 1114–17.) CNB anaesthesia for CS was initially driven by
maternal preference. It was subsequently found to be safer than gA, al-
though with good- quality training and modern anaesthetic standards and
equipment, the difference in maternal mortality appears to be less than it
was in the past.
Advantages of CNB include:
• Both mother and partner can be present at the delivery
• Minimal risk of aspiration and lower risk of anaphylaxis
• The neonate is more alert, promoting early bonding and breastfeeding
• Fewer drugs are administered, with less ‘hangover’ than after gA
• Postoperative analgesia is better with earlier mobilisation.
Mothers who are nervous about having a CS under CNB should be given a
clear explanation of the advantages and disadvantages of CNB and gA but
should not be coerced into having either technique.


## 頁面 875

854
854 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
There are three principal techniques for CNB: epidural, spinal and CSE.
Epidural anaesthesia is mostly used for women who already have labour
epidural analgesia. Spinal anaesthesia is the most popular technique for
elective CS, although in some centres, CSE is preferred.
The speed of onset of sympathectomy that occurs with spinal anaes-
thesia (as opposed to epidural) results in a greater fall in maternal CO and
BP (see % p. 861) and may be associated with a more acidotic neonate at
delivery. When there is particular concern about the speed of onset of a
block, a CSE approach can be used, injecting only a small dose of intrathecal
LA and extending the block if required using the epidural catheter. Spinal
anaesthesia generally provides a better quality of analgesia than epidural
anaesthesia.
Preparation for CS
Whatever anaesthetic technique is chosen, careful history should be taken
and appropriate examination performed. This should include checking:
• Blood group and antibody screen. Routine X- matching of blood is not
required, unless haemorrhage is expected or antibodies that interfere
with X- matching are present.
• Ultrasound reports to establish the position of the placenta. A low-
lying anterior placenta puts a woman at risk of major haemorrhage,
particularly if associated with a scar from a previous CS (see %
pp. 884–5).
An explanation of the technique should be offered. Although CS under
CNB becomes routine for the anaesthetist, it can be intimidating for the
mother. Reassurance and support are important. The possibility of compli-
cations must be mentioned, including the risk of intraoperative discomfort
and its management. Pain during CNB remains a leading obstetric anaes-
thetic cause of maternal litigation. Document all complications that are
discussed.


## 頁面 876

CAESAREAN SECTION: EPIDURAL 855
Caesarean section: epidural
Advantages Disadvantages
• A functioning labour epidural is • Slow onset
easy to top-u p • Large doses of LA
• More stable BP (than spinal) • Poorer quality of block than
• Intraoperative top- up possible spinal anaesthesia
• Epidural can be used for
postoperative analgesia
Indications for CS under epidural anaesthesia
• Women with a functioning epidural for labour analgesia.
• Some specific maternal diseases where rapid changes in SVR might be
problematic (e.g. some cardiac disease), although commonly these
individuals will have a careful CSE.
Technique
• Preparation relevant for all CS:
• History/ examination/ explanation and consent.
• Ensure that antacid prophylaxis has been given.
• Establish 16g or larger IV access. Start crystalloid co-l oad.
• give antibiotic prophylaxis as per local guidelines.
• Insert epidural catheter at the L2/ 3 or L3/ 4 vertebral interspace.
• Position patient in the supine position with left lateral tilt/w edge.
• Test dose, then incrementally top- up the epidural with LA and opioid:
• Boluses of 5– 8mL of 2% lidocaine with 1:200 000 adrenaline ±
sodium bicarbonate every 2– 3min up to a maximum of 7mg/ kg
(720mL). If bicarbonate is used, add 2mL of 8.4% bicarbonate to
18mL of 2% lidocaine with 1:200 000 adrenaline,
OR
• 5mL of 0.5% bupivacaine/ levobupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
every 4– 5min up to a maximum of 2mg/ kg in any 4h period. Single-
enantiomer LAs may offer some safety advantage; however, lidocaine
is still safer than either ropivacaine or levobupivacaine.
• Opioid (e.g. 100 micrograms fentanyl or 2.5mg diamorphine) improves
the quality of the analgesia.
• Establish an S4– T4 block (nipple level). A slightly lower dermatomal
block height may be accepted if epidural opioid is given with epidural
LA (e.g. T6 to light touch). Always check the sacral dermatomes, as
epidural LA occasionally does not spread caudally. Anaesthesia to light
touch is more reliable at predicting adequacy of block than loss of cold
sensation. Document the level of block obtained and the adequacy of
perioperative analgesia.
• Hypotension is much less common than with intrathecal techniques.
However, if hypotension does occur, treat hypotension with the
following (see also % p. 861):
• Boluses of 500mL of crystalloid
• Phenylephrine 50– 100 micrograms IV bolus (expect a reflex
bradycardia) or ephedrine 6mg IV
• Increasing the left uterine displacement.


## 頁面 877

856
856 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
• At delivery, give 2– 5 units of oxytocin as a slow IV bolus. If tachycardia
must be avoided, then an IVI of 40 units of oxytocin in 500mL of
crystalloid given over 4h is an acceptable alternative.
• At the end of the procedure, give an NSAID unless contraindicated
(e.g. 100mg diclofenac PR).
• Epidural diamorphine (2.5mg) given at the time of surgery improves
postoperative analgesia, while epidural fentanyl has little postoperative
analgesic benefit.
• Prescribe postoperative analgesia and VTE prophylaxis as per local
protocol.


## 頁面 878

CAESAREAN SECTION: SPINAL 857
Caesarean section: spinal
Advantages Disadvantages
• Quick onset • Limited duration
• good- quality analgesia • Inadequate analgesia is difficult to
• Easy to perform correct
• Use of opioids provides • Rapid changes in BP and CO
postoperative analgesia
Spinal anaesthesia is the most commonly used technique for elective CS.
Technique
• Preparation as per CS under epidural (see % pp. 855–6).
• A sitting position usually makes finding the midline easier, which may
be helpful with obese patients and may be associated with a faster
onset, although the height of block is less predictable. A lateral position
is associated with a slower onset of block, particularly if a full lateral
position is maintained until the block has fully developed. The block
height may be slightly more consistent, and women sometimes find it
more comfortable than sitting.
• Perform spinal anaesthetic at L3/ 4 interspace or lower using a 25g
or smaller pencil- point needle. The level of the iliac crests usually
corresponds to the spinous process of L4 (Tuffier’s line), although there
is variation between individuals.
• With the orifice pointing cephalad, inject the anaesthetic solution,
e.g. 2.5mL of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine with 300 micrograms
diamorphine or 15 micrograms fentanyl. Intrathecal diamorphine
improves postoperative analgesia, while intrathecal fentanyl has little
postoperative analgesic benefit.
• After injection of the solution, move the woman to a supine position
with left lateral tilt or wedge. When hyperbaric LA solutions are used, it
is important that the cervical spine is kept elevated (pillow) to prevent
LA spreading to the cervical dermatomes.
• Hypotension is more common with spinal anaesthesia than with
epidural anaesthesia. Try to prevent hypotension, rather than treating it
after it has occurred. When possible, a continuous infusion of pressor
agent should be started at the time of the injection of spinal LA (see
% p. 861).
• Continue as for epidural anaesthesia for CS (see % pp. 855–6).


## 頁面 879

858
858 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Caesarean section: CSE
Advantages Disadvantages
• Quick onset • Rapid change in BP and CO
• good- quality analgesia • Technically more difficult
• Intraoperative top- up possible • Higher failure rate of spinal
• Epidural can be used postoperatively • Untested epidural catheter
In some centres, CSE is the technique of choice for CS. Indications
include:
• Limiting the speed of onset of a block. A small initial intrathecal dose of
LA can be supplemented through the epidural as required.
• Expectation of prolonged surgery.
• Ability to use the epidural catheter for postoperative analgesia.
Technique
• Preparation as per CS under epidural (see % pp. 855–6).
• There are two commonly used techniques—a needle- through- needle
technique where the spinal needle is passed through the epidural
needle, and a separate injection technique. The needle-t hrough- needle
technique is associated with a higher incidence of failure to locate
CSF with the spinal needle but only involves one injection. If the two-
injection technique is used, the epidural is usually sited first at L2/3
or above and then the spinal injection is performed at L3/4 or below.
There is a theoretical risk of damaging the catheter with the spinal
needle.
• If the spinal block is inadequate, inject LA or 10mL of 0.9% sodium
chloride through the epidural catheter. (0.9% sodium chloride works by
compressing the dural sac, causing cephalad spread of intrathecal LA.)
Needle- through- needle technique
• Use either a dedicated CSE set or a Tuohy needle and a long 25g (or
smaller) pencil-p oint needle. Locate the epidural space at L3/ 4 or
below with a Tuohy needle and then pass the long spinal needle through
the Tuohy needle into the intrathecal space. Inject anaesthetic solution
with the needle orifice pointing cephalad (e.g. 2.5mL of 0.5% hyperbaric
bupivacaine with 300 micrograms diamorphine or 15 micrograms
fentanyl).
• Insert the epidural catheter. Aspirate the catheter carefully for CSF.
Two- needle technique
• Insert an epidural at L2/ 3 or above. After the catheter is in position,
perform a spinal injection at L3/ 4 or below with a 25g or smaller
pencil- point needle.
With either technique, testing the catheter with LA before the intra-
thecal dose has receded may be unreliable. However, using the catheter
intraoperatively is reasonable, as the anaesthetist is continuously present to
deal with the consequences of an intrathecal injection. This may not be true
if opioids are given through the catheter for postoperative analgesia at the
end of the procedure before the block has receded.
Continue as for spinal anaesthesia for CS (see % p. 857).


## 頁面 880

CAESAREAN SECTION: CSE 859
Special considerations
• Although the incidence of major complications of CNB, as identified by
the Third National Audit Project of the RCoA, was higher when a CSE
technique was used, the numbers were very small (two or four patients,
depending on whether an optimistic or a pessimistic analysis was used)
and the study cautions against overinterpretation of these results.


## 頁面 881

860
860 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Inadequate anaesthesia
Every patient should be warned of the possibility of intraoperative discom-
fort and this should be documented. Of attempted CNB anaesthetics for
CS 1-5% are inadequate for surgery. The majority should be identified be-
fore the operation commences.
Inadequate block identified before surgery has started
Epidural
• If no block develops, then the catheter is incorrectly positioned. It may
be reinserted or a spinal performed.
• If a partial but inadequate block has developed, the epidural may be resited
or withdrawn slightly. If the toxic limit for the LA agent has been reached,
elective procedures can be abandoned, but for urgent procedures, a gA
or a spinal anaesthetic will be required. Be very cautious about converting a
partially functioning epidural anaesthetic to a spinal anaesthetic. Although a
normal spinal dose of hyperbaric LA is commonly used, aggressive control
of the spread of LA is needed to prevent a high or total spinal occurring.
This is done by positioning the head up initially and then slowly lowering the
head to achieve the required level of block.
Spinal
• If no block develops, a repeat spinal may be performed.
• If a partial but inadequate block develops, an epidural may be inserted
and slowly topped up.
• Use a gA if required.
Intraoperative inadequate block
In this situation, good communication with the mother and surgeon is es-
sential. If possible, stop surgery. Identify the likely cause of pain (e.g. in-
adequately blocked sacral nerve roots, peritoneal pain). Try to give the
mother a realistic expectation of continued duration and severity of pain.
If the pain has occurred before the delivery of the fetus, it is very likely that
a gA will be required.
• If the patient requests gA, in all but exceptional circumstances, comply.
• If the anaesthetist feels that the severity of pain is not acceptable,
persuade the patient that gA is required.
Spinal
Reassure and treat with:
• Inhaled NO
2
• IV opioid (e.g. 25– 50 micrograms fentanyl, repeated as necessary)—
inform the neonatologists that opioid has been given
• Surgical infiltration of LA (care with total dose)
• gA.
Epidural/ CSE
• Treat as per spinal anaesthesia, but in addition, epidural opioid (e.g. 100
micrograms fentanyl) and/ or more epidural LA can be given.


## 頁面 882

HyPOTENSION 861
Hypotension
Hypotension is common with CNB anaesthesia, especially spinal anaes-
thesia.7 Preventing hypotension, rather than treating it after it has occurred,
is associated with better fetal and maternal outcomes. Aim to maintain the
systolic BP at ≥90% of baseline.
Prophylactic pressor agents are key, but it is also important to minimise
aortocaval occlusion (i.e. lateral tilt) and a fluid co-l oad should be routine
unless fluid is being restricted.
Pressor agents
Using prophylactic pressor agents is beneficial for both mother and fetus.
α- agonists (phenylephrine and metaraminol) should be considered as the 1°
agents. Ephedrine (6mg bolus) is an acceptable alternative, despite possibly
causing marginally more fetal acidosis than phenylephrine. Noradrenaline,
which has both α and β action, has been shown to have marginal advantage
over phenylephrine, but currently its use as a peripheral infusion remains
controversial. Phenylephrine bolus doses of 50– 100 micrograms can cause
reflex bradycardias, so if possible, use a phenylephrine or metaraminol in-
fusion instead. A reduction in HR is associated with a reduced CO, so treat
bradycardia with either ephedrine or an anticholinergic agent. A simple re-
gime for phenylephrine infusion is outlined below.
• Put 20mL of 100 micrograms/m L of phenylephrine in a syringe driver.
• Start infusion of 30mL/ h as the spinal solution is injected.
• Titrate to response in increments of 10mL/ h.
• Expect the HR to slow— give anticholinergic agents as required.
• Reduce and stop the infusion post- delivery.
• In pre- eclamptic and hypertensive individuals, start at a lower
infusion rate.
Fluid
Crystalloid preloading is ineffective at preventing hypotension, and in
women with severe pre- eclampsia, large preloads are harmful, predisposing
to pulmonary oedema. Using colloids as a preload is more effective, but
colloids are associated with a variety of problems, including anaphylaxis and
clotting abnormalities.
While preloading with crystalloid is ineffective, co-l oading crystalloid
(giving fluid as the block is establishing) is more effective.
A co- load should:
• Be given immediately before or during the onset of the CNB technique
to minimise redistribution
• Be limited to 10– 15mL/ kg of crystalloid. Larger volumes should be
avoided as they offer little advantage and may be harmful. (More fluid
may be given intraoperatively if clinically indicated.)
Do not delay an emergency CS to allow a fluid preload to be administered.


## 頁面 883

862
862 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Caesarean section: general anaesthesia
Elective gA for CS is now uncommon in the UK. Safety remains a concern
as many of the major anaesthetic complications still relate to difficulties with
the airway. Failed intubation is much more frequent in obstetric than in non-
obstetric anaesthesia (see % p. 864). All obstetric anaesthetists should be
familiar with a failed intubation drill.
Indications for GA
Include:
• Maternal request
• Category 1 CS— while gA is the most commonly used technique, CNB
is only marginally slower with a well- drilled anaesthetic team
• Failed CNB or CNB contraindicated (e.g. coagulopathy, maternal
hypovolaemia)
• Additional/ long surgery planned which may make CNB less acceptable.
Technique
• History and examination, including airway assessment.
• Using a gA checklist can be very helpful to reduce stress and errors.
• Antacid prophylaxis— see details below.
• Position supine with left lateral tilt/w edge. Consider head- up position
to improve view at laryngoscopy (especially in obese patients).
• Preoxygenate for 3–5 min or with 4– 8 VC breaths with a high flow
through the circuit and a good face mask seal. At term, women have
a reduced FRC and a higher RR and O consumption. This reduces
2
the time required for denitrogenation but also reduces the time from
apnoea to arterial O desaturation. The use of nasal O should be
2 2
considered.
• Perform RSI. The risk of awareness without recall may be increased if
the dose of induction agent is reduced. Consider using a short-a cting
opioid. (Be aware that opioids administered before delivery may increase
neonatal respiratory depression, so always inform the neonatologist.)
• Induction is usually performed with either propofol or thiopental.
Ketamine can be used if clinically indicated.
• A 7.0mm ETT is adequate and may make intubation easier.
• Ventilate with 50% O in NO. If severe fetal distress is suspected, then
2 2
75% O or higher may be appropriate. Maintain ETCO at 4.0– 4.5kPa
2 2
(30– 34 mmHg).
• Rapidly increase the end- tidal concentration of anaesthetic agent to at
least 0.75 of MAC.
• At delivery, give 2– 5 units of oxytocin IV bolus (or IVI of 40 units of
oxytocin in 500mL of crystalloid, infused over 4h if tachycardia to be
avoided), opioid (e.g. 10– 15mg morphine) and IV paracetamol.
• At the end of the procedure, consider surgical infiltration of LA or
performing regional blocks (e.g. TAP, ilioinguinal, quadratus lumborum
or rectus sheath).
• An NSAID can be given PR or IV.
• Extubation is a high- risk procedure— extubate awake.
• Midwives may be less familiar with recovery and airway care. The same
standard of recovery staff should be available to women on labour
wards as in a normal theatre recovery unit.


## 頁面 884

CAESAREAN SECTION: gENERAL ANAESTHESIA 863
Antacid prophylaxis
Aspiration of particulate matter, blood or bile is associated with worse
outcomes than aspiration of gastric fluid. Fluid aspiration is commonly as-
sociated with chemical pneumonitis and the severity of this is, in turn, de-
pendent on the volume and acidity of the aspirated fluid. Use of antacids
and prokinetic agents can elevate the gastric pH and reduce the intragastric
volume. A suggested regime is the following.
Elective surgery
• Ranitidine 150mg or omeprazole 40mg PO 12h and 2h before surgery.
• Metoclopramide 10mg PO 2h before surgery.
• 30mL of 0.3M sodium citrate immediately before induction of gA.
(gastric pH >2.5 is maintained for only 30min after 30mL of 0.3M
sodium citrate. If a gA is required after this, a further dose of citrate is
required.)
Emergency surgery
If prophylaxis has not already been given:
• Ranitidine 50mg by slow IV injection immediately before surgery.
Remember this will not alter the risk if aspiration occurs during
induction but may offer benefit by the time of extubation.
• Metoclopramide 10mg IV injection immediately before surgery.
• 30mL of 0.3M sodium citrate PO immediately before induction of gA.
Effect of general anaesthesia on the fetus
Lower fetal Apgar scores at 1 and 5min are more common when gA is used
for CS. Most anaesthetic agents, except for muscle relaxants, rapidly cross
the placenta. Thiopental can be detected in the fetus within 30s of admin-
istration, with peak umbilical vein concentration occurring at around 1min.
Umbilical artery to umbilical vein concentrations approach unity at 8min.
Opioids administered before delivery may cause fetal depression. If there is
a specific indication for opioids before delivery, they should be given and the
neonatologist informed. Hypotension, hypoxia, hypocapnia and excessive
maternal catecholamine secretion may all be harmful to the fetus.


## 頁面 885

864
864 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Failed intubation
(See also % pp. 368–72.)
Failed intubation occurs much more commonly in the obstetric popula-
tion (71:400).8 If a failed intubation occurs, the mortality is 71:90. Causes of
failed intubation include obesity, increased fatty tissue, pharyngeal/l aryngeal
oedema, large tongue, large breasts, incorrect cricoid pressure, complete
dentition and the experience and training of anaesthetic staff.
The Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association and the DAS produced three
algorithms in 2015: (1) for safe obstetric gA, (2) for obstetric failed in-
tubation and (3) for CICO scenarios (M https:// www.oaa- anaes.ac.uk/ as-
sets/ _ managed/ cms/ files/ Clinical%20guidelines/ guideline_ Algorithms_
2015.pdf).
Before embarking on a gA, it is important to have thought about alterna-
tive plans if intubation is difficult or if intubation fails, and to have discussed
these plans with the anaesthetic assistant. gA checklists can greatly assist
with this.
In the event of a failed intubation, deciding on whether to continue sur-
gery or to wake the mother can be difficult. Factors to consider include the
mother’s condition, the fetal condition (while waiting for the muscle re-
laxant to wear off, fetal monitoring can be reapplied and this may give useful
additional information), the experience of the anaesthetist, the anticipated
difficulty of the surgery, patient factors, including obesity and starvation
status, and the difficulty of alternative methods of anaesthesia. Additional
factors that can only be established after the airway has been rescued after
a failed intubation include the method by which the airway is rescued (i.e.
2nd- generation SgA device or difficult mask ventilation) and whether any
airway trauma has occurred. Remember that when a failed intubation oc-
curs, the priority is oxygenation.
If the decision is to continue surgery, ideally a 2nd- generation SgA device
would be inserted (release cricoid pressure before insertion), and empty
the stomach with an OgT. The anaesthetist will have to decide on whether
to opt for spontaneous respiration or paralyse (ideally with rocuronium if
sugammadex is readily available) and ventilate. Remember to ask the ob-
stetricians to avoid fundal pressure at delivery if possible, because fundal
pressure can increase intragastric pressure to >70mmHg. Try to avoid fur-
ther instrumentation of the airway, but be prepared for front of neck ac-
cess, and if familiar, have a fibreoptic scope immediately to hand.


## 頁面 886

POSTOPERATIVE ANALgESIA 865
Postoperative analgesia
Most postpartum women are very well motivated and mobilise quickly.
However, effective analgesia does allow earlier mobilisation. The main-
stays of postoperative analgesia are opioids, NSAIDs and paracetamol. The
route that these are given is dependent on the intraoperative anaesthetic
technique.
Opioids
Intrathecal/e pidural opioid
• CNB fentanyl lasts little longer than CNB LA and has little postoperative
analgesic benefit. If an epidural catheter is left in situ, epidural fentanyl
may be given as an infusion or as intermittent postoperative boluses
(50– 100 micrograms up to 2- hourly for two or three doses). However,
this is rarely done.
• Intrathecal diamorphine (300– 400 micrograms) can be expected to
provide 6– 18h of analgesia. More than 40% of women will require no
other postoperative opioid. Higher doses have been recommended
but are associated with an increased incidence of side effects. Pruritus
is very common (60– 80% of cases), although only 1– 2% have severe
pruritus. The evidence that antihistamines reduce pruritus caused by
CNB opioids is poor.
• Epidural diamorphine (2.5mg in 10mL of 0.9% sodium chloride)
provides 6– 10h of analgesia after a single dose. Intermittent doses may
be given if the epidural catheter is left in situ.
• Intrathecal preservative- free morphine (100 micrograms) provides long-
lasting analgesia (12– 18h). However, pruritus and nausea are common.
Doses above 150 micrograms are associated with increased side effects
without improved analgesia. The low lipophilicity of morphine may
increase the risk of late respiratory depression. Epidural morphine
(2– 3mg) provides analgesia for 6– 24h, but pruritus is again common and
nausea occurs in 20–4 0% of cases. Diamorphine is used much more
commonly in the UK than morphine.
IV patient- controlled analgesia or oral opioids
• IV PCA or PO opioids can be used, although these are not as effective
as CNB analgesia.
Neonatal effects of maternal opioids
• A small quantity of opioid may be transferred to the neonate through
breast milk (see % pp. 867–8). Rarely, this can be associated with
neonatal respiratory depression.
NSAIDs
• NSAIDs are very effective postoperative analgesics, reducing opioid
requirements. They should be administered regularly whenever
possible, but beware renal impairment in severe pre-e clampsia, and
care with significant haemorrhage.


## 頁面 887

866
866 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Summary of dosing regimes
(See Table 35.3.)
Table 35.3 Summary of dosing regimens
Procedure Technique Suggested dose
Labour Epidural loading 20mL of 0.1% bupivacaine with 2
micrograms/ mL fentanyl in divided doses
Epidural infusion 10mL/ h of 0.1% bupivacaine with 2
micrograms/ mL fentanyl
Top- ups 10– 20mL of 0.1% bupivacaine with 2
micrograms/ mL fentanyl
CSE Intrathecal: 0.5– 1mL of 0.25% bupivacaine
with 5– 25 micrograms/ mL fentanyl
Epidural: top- up and infusion as above
PCEA 10mL boluses of 0.1% bupivacaine with 2
micrograms/ mL fentanyl with a 15– 20min
lockout
LSCS* Spinal 2.5mL of 0.5% bupivacaine in 8% glucose
(‘heavy’) + 300 micrograms diamorphine
Epidural 15– 20mL of 2% lidocaine with 1:200 000
adrenaline
(± 0.5– 2mL of preservative- free 8.4%
sodium bicarbonate)
CSE Normal spinal dose (reduce if slow onset of
block is required)
If needed, top up the epidural with 5mL
aliquots of 2% lidocaine with 1:200 000
adrenaline or 0.5% (levo)bupivacaine
Post- LSCS gA Bilateral ilioinguinal nerve blocks, rectus
analgesia sheath blocks, TAP blocks or local infiltration
at end of surgery
IV aliquots of morphine until comfortable
Further opioid can be given PO or IV (PCA is
commonly used)
75mg diclofenac IV and 1g paracetamol
IV before extubation, followed by 50mg
diclofenac PO 8- hourly
CNB and gA Regular paracetamol analgesics PRN
CNB 100mg diclofenac PR at end of surgery,
followed by 50mg diclofenac PO 8- hourly
Epidural diamorphine (2.5mg) in 10mL of
0.9% sodium chloride. On rare occasions the
epidural catheter is left in situ and doses can
be repeated up to 4-hourly
* LSCS, lower- segment Caesarean section.


## 頁面 888

BREASTFEEDINg AND DRUg TRANSFER 867
Breastfeeding and drug transfer
For drugs to be transferred to a neonate through breastfeeding, they must
be secreted in the milk and absorbed in the neonatal gI tract and must not
undergo extensive 1st- pass metabolism in the neonatal liver.
In general, for breastfed infants, the neonatal serum concentration of a
drug is <2% of maternal serum concentration, resulting in a subtherapeutic
dose. Most drugs are therefore safe. There are some exceptions, either
because transfer is much higher or because transfer of even small quantities
of a drug is unacceptable. Drugs with high protein binding may displace bili-
rubin and precipitate kernicterus in a jaundiced neonate.
Factors that make significant transfer more likely include low maternal
protein binding, lipophilicity or, with hydrophilic drugs, a molecular weight
of <200Da and weak bases which increase the proportion of ionised drug
in the weakly acidic breast milk, leading to ‘trapping’.
Most opioids have a milk- to- maternal plasma ratio of 72, while NSAIDs
have ratios of 70.1 or below, and paracetamol of 1.
Table 35.4 Drug safety in breastfeeding
Drug Comment
Opioids Small amount delivered to neonatal serum. Minor concern
about the long duration of action of pethidine’s metabolite
norpethidine. Avoid codeine, and care with other oral opioids
if mother or neonate excessively drowsy (see % p. 868)
NSAIDs Most NSAIDs are considered safe in breastfeeding. Some
would advise caution with aspirin because of unsubstantiated
concerns about causing Reye’s syndrome in the neonate
Antibiotics Penicillins and cephalosporins are safe, although trace
amounts may be passed to the neonate
Tetracycline should be avoided (although absorption
is probably minimal because of chelation with calcium
in milk)
Chloramphenicol may cause bone marrow suppression in
the neonate and should be avoided
Ciprofloxacin is present in high concentrations in breast
milk and should be avoided
Antipsychotics generally suggested that these are avoided, although the
amount excreted in milk is probably too small to be harmful.
Chlorpromazine and clozapine cause neonate drowsiness
Cardiac drugs Amiodarone is present in milk in significant amounts and
breastfeeding should be discontinued
Most β- blockers are secreted in minimal amounts. Sotalol
is present in larger amounts
While enalapril and captopril have no known adverse
effects, other ACE inhibitors, ARBs and amlodipine should
be avoided
Anticonvulsants While carbamazepine does not accumulate in the neonate,
phenobarbital and diazepam may. Neonates should be
observed for evidence of sedation

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 35.4 Drug safety in breastfeeding |
| --- |
| Drug Comment |
| Opioids Small amount delivered to neonatal serum. Minor concern about the long duration of action of pethidine’s metabolite norpethidine. Avoid codeine, and care with other oral opioids if mother or neonate excessively drowsy (see % p. 868) NSAIDs Most NSAIDs are considered safe in breastfeeding. Some would advise caution with aspirin because of unsubstantiated concerns about causing Reye’s syndrome in the neonate Antibiotics Penicillins and cephalosporins are safe, although trace amounts may be passed to the neonate Tetracycline should be avoided (although absorption is probably minimal because of chelation with calcium in milk) Chloramphenicol may cause bone marrow suppression in the neonate and should be avoided Ciprofloxacin is present in high concentrations in breast milk and should be avoided Antipsychotics generally suggested that these are avoided, although the amount excreted in milk is probably too small to be harmful. Chlorpromazine and clozapine cause neonate drowsiness Cardiac drugs Amiodarone is present in milk in significant amounts and breastfeeding should be discontinued Most β- blockers are secreted in minimal amounts. Sotalol is present in larger amounts While enalapril and captopril have no known adverse effects, other ACE inhibitors, ARBs and amlodipine should be avoided Anticonvulsants While carbamazepine does not accumulate in the neonate, phenobarbital and diazepam may. Neonates should be observed for evidence of sedation |
|  |


## 頁面 889

868
868 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Timing of administration just after breastfeeding can reduce drug transfer.
Breastfeeding constitutes a metabolic and fluid stress for the mother, so
keep the mother well hydrated and try to minimise periods of nil by mouth.
Treat nausea and vomiting promptly.
Codeine, oxycodone, dihydrocodeine and oral morphine
Small quantities of opioid are transferred in breast milk, but the risk of neo-
natal respiratory depression is very small. However, there have been case
reports of neonatal respiratory depression after maternal administration
of PO morphine, oxycodone and dihydrocodeine and one neonatal death
following prolonged use of postoperative codeine. Postnatal women taking
opioids should be observed and if they, or their offspring, appear exces-
sively drowsy, the opioid should be stopped. Breastfeeding women should
not be discharged with opioid analgesia.
Table 35.4 gives information on some agents. A more comprehensive list
of drugs compatible with breastfeeding can be found at:
The Breastfeeding Network: M https:// www.breastfeedingnetwork.org.
uk/ drugs- factsheets
Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed): M https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/ books/ NBK501922/


## 頁面 890

RETAINED PLACENTA 869
Retained placenta
• IV access with 16g or larger cannula.
• Assess total amount and rate of blood loss and cardiovascular stability.
Blood loss may be difficult to accurately assess. If rapid blood loss is
continuing, then urgent X- match and evacuation of placenta under gA
is required.
• CNB anaesthesia is safe, provided estimated blood loss is <1000mL,
but if there are signs suggesting hypovolaemia, gA may be required.
• Remember antacid prophylaxis.
• For gA, use an RSI technique with a cuffed ETT.
• CNB anaesthesia can be performed either by topping up an existing
epidural or with a spinal (e.g. 2– 2.5mL of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine
plus 15 micrograms fentanyl or 300 micrograms diamorphine
intrathecally). A T7 block reliably ensures analgesia.
• Occasionally, uterine relaxation is required. Under gA, this can be
produced by increasing the halogenated vapour concentration. Under
CNB anaesthesia, a sublingual gTN spray is usually effective, although
expect transient hypotension.
• On delivery of the placenta, give 5 units of oxytocin ± an infusion of
oxytocin (e.g. 40 units in 500mL of crystalloid over 4h).
• At the end of the procedure, give an NSAID unless contraindicated.


## 頁面 891

870
870 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Fetal neuroprotection
Magnesium
• Magnesium should be considered for all women expected to deliver
before 34w gestation to reduce the incidence of cerebral palsy in
the baby.9
• Dose of magnesium for neuroprotection is 4g IV bolus of magnesium
sulfate over 15min, followed by an IVI of 1g/ h until birth or for 24h,
whichever is sooner.
• Patients receiving magnesium should be monitored every 4h for signs of
toxicity, including recording pulse, BP, RR and deep tendon reflexes.
• If the patient develops oliguria or renal failure, monitoring for
magnesium toxicity should be performed more frequently and a
reduction in the dose of magnesium should be considered.


## 頁面 892

IN UTERO FETAL DEATH 871
In utero fetal death
• The death in utero of a formed fetus is emotionally devastating for a
family. The delivery can also be very traumatic, and it is important to
be as supportive as possible during this period. The cause of fetal loss
is varied and often uncertain. Remember that in utero deaths can be
associated with concealed abruption, sepsis and DIC.
• Sometimes women will have to be delivered by CS, but the majority
undergo a vaginal delivery.
• Analgesia for labour includes all the normal techniques. Patient-
controlled IV opioids are often used, as is CNB analgesia. However,
before any CNB techniques are performed, check that maternal clotting
is normal. Clotting derangement can occur even when the fetal death is
thought to have occurred very recently.
• Delivery by CS can be performed under regional anaesthesia or gA.
This should be guided by maternal preference, as well as maternal
safety.


## 頁面 893

872
872 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Pregnancy- induced hypertension and
pre- eclampsia
Pre- eclampsia remains a leading cause of worldwide maternal deaths.
Estimates of incidence vary geographically but are of the order of 2– 8% of
all pregnancies. Although a systemic disorder, its pathogenesis is primarily
placental. The precise aetiology is complex and incompletely understood.
Immunological factors, genetic factors and endothelial dysfunction, as well
as abnormalities in placental implantation, fatty acid metabolism, coagula-
tion and platelet factors, are all implicated. Early- onset and late- onset pre-
eclampsia are increasingly recognised as separate, although interrelated,
subtypes. Early onset is primarily of placental cause, while late onset is not
only related to placental factors but also with maternal genetic predispos-
ition to cardiovascular and metabolic disease. Early-o nset disease is usually
more severe.
Definitions are arbitrary. Often diagnosis is made by considering the whole
picture. However, commonly used definitions are:
Hypertension
Sustained systolic BP >140mmHg or diastolic BP >90mmHg.
Chronic hypertension
Hypertension that existed before the 20th week of pregnancy or those
already taking antihypertensive medication prepregnancy.
Gestational hypertension
Hypertension that develops after the 20th week of pregnancy.
Pre- eclampsia
• New-o nset hypertension with one or more other features:
• Proteinuria (urine protein:creatinine ratio ≥30mg/ mmol or
albumin:creatinine ratio ≥8mg/m mol, or ≥1g/ L [2+] on dipstick)
• Other maternal organ dysfunction (renal, hepatic or neurological)
• Haematological involvement
• Uteroplacental dysfunction (fetal growth restriction or abnormal
uteroplacental blood flow on ultrasound).10
• Pre- eclampsia with any of the following features all have a greater
potential for poor outcome: severe hypertension that does not
respond to treatment or is associated with ongoing or recurring severe
headaches, visual scotomata, nausea or vomiting, epigastric pain,
oliguria, progressive deterioration in laboratory blood tests such as
rising creatinine or liver transaminases, a falling platelet count or failure
of fetal growth or abnormal Doppler findings.
• The distinction between early and late forms of pre-e clampsia is
important as early onset is commonly associated with a higher risk.
Onset before the 35th gestational week is considered ‘early onset’.
• Eclampsia (see % p. 877) refers to convulsions occurring in pregnancy
or the puerperium in the absence of other causes. Signs of pre-
eclampsia may not be manifest until after a fit.


## 頁面 894

PREgNANCy-INDUCED HyPERTENSION AND PRE-ECLAMPSIA 873
Pathophysiology
Cardiorespiratory
• Hypertension and i sensitivity to catecholamine and exogenous
vasopressors
• Reduced circulating volume, but i TBW
• SVR is usually i and CO reduced
• i capillary permeability which may result in:
• Pulmonary oedema— be very careful to avoid fluid overload
• Laryngeal and pharyngeal oedema. Voice change may give an
indication of this. Stridor is a very worrying sign.
Haematological
• Reduced platelet count with i platelet consumption and
hypercoagulability with i fibrin activation and breakdown— DIC
may result
• i Hct due to reduced circulating volume.
Renal function
• Reduced gFR
• i permeability to large molecules resulting in proteinuria
• Oliguria in severe disease.
Cerebral function
• Headache, visual disturbance and generalised hyperreflexia
• Cerebrovascular haemorrhage
• Eclampsia (resulting from cerebral oedema or cerebrovascular
vasoconstriction). Clonus indicates a high risk of imminent eclampsia.
Fetoplacental unit
• Reduced fetal growth with associated oligohydramnios
• Poor placental perfusion and i sensitivity to changes in maternal BP.
• Non- reassuring CTgs.
• Changes in umbilical arterial blood flow. A reduction of umbilical arterial
diastolic blood flow, and particularly reverse diastolic flow, is indicative
of poor fetal outcome and an indication for early intervention.
Management of pre- eclampsia
Prevention
• Antiplatelet agents (aspirin 75– 150mg) should be prescribed for patients
at high risk (such as chronic hypertension, type 1 or type 2 diabetes
or previous hypertensive disease) or with two or more moderate risk
factors (such as booking BMI >36kg/ m2 and age >40y).
Early detection
• There are a variety of cardiovascular and biochemical markers that can
predict pre- eclampsia, including placental growth factor (the Triage PlgF
test) and the sFlt- 1/ PlgF ratio.11 These tests can help to exclude pre-
eclampsia in women between 20w and 35w of gestation.


## 頁面 895

874
874 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Symptom control
• Further management is aimed at controlling the symptoms of pre-
eclampsia and preventing major harm to mother or fetus, until the
placenta is delivered. After delivery of the placenta, severe symptoms
will usually start to resolve within 24– 48h.
• In general, delivery is not indicated before 37w gestational age, unless
BP cannot be controlled to below 160/ 90mmHg or there are other
medical indications.
• If the fetus is preterm at the time of delivery, when possible, delivery
should be delayed for administration of steroids to promote fetal lung
maturation. Magnesium may also be administered, not only to reduce
the risk of eclampsia, but also for fetal neuroprotection.
• After 37w gestational age, timing of the delivery should be agreed
between a senior obstetrician and the mother.
Antihypertensive therapy
• BP should be controlled to below 135/ 85mmHg to reduce maternal
morbidity, particularly from intracranial haemorrhage, encephalopathy
and myocardial ischaemia/ failure. If the BP is above 160/ 110mmHg,
urgent treatment is required. BP should be measured every 15–3 0min
until it is below 160/ 110mmHg. Once below 160/ 110mmHg, the aim is
to control BP to <135/ 85mmHg.
• In the UK, the 1° antihypertensive agent is the combined α- and β-
blocker labetalol. If contraindicated or additional agents are required,
nifedipine or methyldopa can be used. In severe or resistant cases, IV
agents may be required (as below).
• ACE inhibitors should be avoided as they are associated with
oligohydramnios, stillbirth and neonatal renal failure.
• Rapid control of severe hypertension can be achieved with:
• Labetalol (5– 10mg IV every 10min)
• Hydralazine (5mg IV aliquots to a maximum of 20mg). The 1st IV
dose of hydralazine is sometimes given with a 500mL crystalloid
fluid bolus.
• PO nifedipine (10mg). Sublingual nifedipine should be avoided
because of rapid changes in placental circulation, which may
compromise fetal condition.
Protection from eclampsia
• Magnesium sulfate reduces the incidence of eclampsia. Magnesium
treatment should be considered if any of the following are present:
clonus, persistent or recurrent headaches, visual scotoma, nausea and
vomiting, epigastric pain, oliguria, severe hypertension or progressive
deterioration in renal or liver function tests.
• For magnesium dosing, see % p. 877.
Fluid management
Fluid management in severe pre-e clampsia is critical. Intravascular volume
is depleted, but TBW is increased. Excessive fluid load may result in pul-
monary oedema, but underfilling may compromise fetal circulation and
renal function. general principles are:
• Fluid management protocols should be followed, and a named individual
should have overall responsibility for fluid therapy.
• Measure hourly urine output.


## 頁面 896

PREgNANCy-INDUCED HyPERTENSION AND PRE-ECLAMPSIA 875
• Usually total fluid intake is limited to 80mL/ h. Beware of fluid loads
being delivered with drugs. It may be necessary to increase the
concentrations of agents such as oxytocin or magnesium to stay within
the 80mL/ h limit.
• Avoid fluid loading before CNB analgesia.
• Be cautious with fluid during CS; aim for neutral balance at the end.
• Invasive BP monitoring is indicated in severe pre-e clampsia for:
• Monitoring the response to laryngoscopy and surgery during gA
• Taking repeated ABgs
• Monitoring rapidly acting hypotensive agents.
• CVP monitoring is rarely indicated, even in severe pre-e clampsia.
Analgesia for vaginal delivery
• Effective epidural analgesia controls excessive surges in BP during labour
and is recommended.
• Check platelet count before performing an epidural. The ‘acceptable’
level of platelet count is debatable and based on little evidence.
However, common general guidelines are:
• If the platelet count is <100 × 109/ L, a clotting screen is required.
• If the platelet count is >75 × 109/ L and the clotting screen is normal,
then CNB techniques are acceptable.
• With a platelet count of <75 × 109/ L, a careful assessment from a
senior individual is required and the potential risks and benefits should
be discussed with the patient.
• Usually a platelet count within 6h of insertion is adequate, but if
maternal condition is deteriorating or if the platelet numbers are rapidly
falling, then a count must be performed immediately before placement.
• Fluid loading before CNB analgesia is not required, but monitor BP and
fetus carefully and treat changes in BP promptly with cautious doses of
ephedrine or phenylephrine.
Anaesthesia for CS in pre- eclamptic patients
gA or CNB may be used. gA is indicated if significant thrombocytopenia
or coagulopathy have developed.
General anaesthesia
• Assess the airway carefully. Sometimes partners may be better able
to assess the onset of facial oedema. A history of stridor is of major
concern. A selection of small tube sizes must be available. Consider
AFOI in severe cases.
• Obtund the hypertensive response to laryngoscopy, e.g. alfentanil 1–
2mg (inform paediatrician that opioids have been used) and/o r labetalol
10– 20mg before induction. Remifentanil TCI or bolus may be useful if
the anaesthetist is familiar with its use. In very severe pre-e clampsia,
intra- arterial pressure monitoring is required before induction.
• If magnesium has been used, expect prolongation of action of NDMRs.
Use a reduced dose and assess neuromuscular function with a nerve
stimulator.
• Magnesium can also cause uterine relaxation, particularly with gA; an
oxytocin infusion may be helpful.
• Ensure adequate analgesia before extubation. The hypertensive
response to extubation may also need to be controlled with
antihypertensive agents (e.g. labetalol 10– 20mg).


## 頁面 897

876
876 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
CNB anaesthesia
Despite the depleted intravascular volume that occurs with severe pre-
eclampsia, pre- eclamptic patients are less prone to the hypotensive con-
sequences of CNB anaesthesia than normal individuals. Spinal anaesthesia
consistently produces better analgesia than epidural anaesthesia and should
not be avoided.
• Platelet count and, if necessary, a clotting screen should be assessed.
• A reduced volume of fluid co-l oad should be used. By the end of
the procedure, aim to have given no more crystalloid than measured
blood loss.
• Use ephedrine or phenylephrine as indicated. However, be cautious
because they may have an increased effect.
Effective postoperative analgesia is required, but avoid NSAIDs as these pa-
tients are prone to renal impairment and may have impaired platelet count
or function. When the proteinuria has resolved, which is often within 48h,
NSAIDs may be introduced.
Continue care in HDU or ICU.


## 頁面 898

ECLAMPSIA 877
Eclampsia
Incidence
Around 2:10 000 pregnancies in the developed world,12 but there are wide
international variations. Remember most seizures in pregnancy are not due
to eclampsia. Always be alert to the differential diagnosis.
• Eclamptic fits occur most commonly in the 3rd trimester or within 12h
of delivery.
• Eclampsia is a life- threatening event.
• Management is aimed at immediate control of the fit and 2° prevention
of further fits.
Management
• Airway (left lateral position with jaw thrust), breathing (bag and mask
ventilation and measure O saturation), circulation (obtain IV access and
2
measure BP when possible; avoid aortocaval compression).
• Control fits with magnesium:
• Load with 4g IV over 5min, followed by 1g/ h for 24h.
• Recurrent seizures should be treated with 2– 4g IV bolus over 5min.
• The therapeutic magnesium plasma concentration is 2–4 mmol/ L.
Magnesium levels may be monitored clinically or with laboratory
monitoring. Loss of reflexes occurs at concentrations of >5.0mmol/L,
reduced RR at concentrations of 6.0-7.0mmol/L and cardiac arrest at
concentrations of >12.0mmol/L. Reduce infusion rate with oliguria.
• Patients on calcium channel antagonists are at particular risk of toxicity.
• Toxicity can be treated with IV calcium (e.g. 10mL of 10% calcium
chloride or calcium gluconate).
• If eclampsia occurs before delivery, once the fit has been controlled,
think about the urgency of the delivery. In general, providing the fetus
is not distressed, eclampsia is not an indication for emergency CS. The
patient should be stabilised on magnesium and then consideration given
to vaginal or operative delivery. Care should be continued on HDU
or ICU.


## 頁面 899

878
878 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
HELLP syndrome
Haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets comprise the HELLP
syndrome. It is usually associated with pre-e clampsia or eclampsia, but
these are not a prerequisite for diagnosis. Severe HELLP syndrome has a
5% maternal mortality. HELLP rarely presents before the 20th week of ges-
tation, but one- sixth of cases present before the 3rd trimester and a further
third present postnatally (usually within 48h of delivery). Symptoms are
sometimes of a vague flu-l ike illness, which may delay diagnosis. Maintain a
high index of suspicion.
Features of HELLP
• Evidence of haemolysis (a falling Hb concentration without evidence
of overt bleeding, haemoglobinuria, elevated bilirubin in serum and
urine, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)). Haemolysis is the least
common element of HELLP and is an indication of severe disease.
• Elevated LFTs: AST or ALT. Epigastric or RUQ abdominal pain is present
in 90% of women with HELLP. Liver failure and hepatic rupture may
occur. Elevation of AST to >150 units/ L is associated with a poorer
maternal outcome. Consider the differential diagnosis of acute fatty
liver of pregnancy. Remember the potential for hypoglycaemia. Most
women with RUQ pain and a platelet count of <20 × 109/ L have had
an intrahepatic or subcapsular bleed.
• A falling platelet count: platelets <100 × 109/ L are of concern, while a
count <50 × 109/ L is indicative of severe disease.
• Hypertension and proteinuria are present in 80% of women with
HELLP and 50% suffer nausea and vomiting. Convulsions and gI
haemorrhage are occasional presenting features.
The only definitive treatment is delivery of the placenta. Steroids do not
alter disease progression, but if maternal condition allows, delivery may be
delayed, allowing administration of steroids to promote fetal lung maturity
if needed.
• The method of delivery depends on maternal condition and the
likelihood of successfully inducing labour. Severe HELLP syndrome may
require an urgent CS.
• Coagulation abnormalities may preclude the use of CNB. Consideration
must be given to both the absolute platelet number as well as its rate of
fall. All patients require a clotting screen.
• Be prepared for major haemorrhage.
Further management is supportive, with appropriate replacement of blood
products as required.
• Invasive monitoring is dictated by clinical condition of the patient.
• ARDS, renal failure and DIC may develop.
• After delivery of the placenta, recovery starts within 24–4 8h.


## 頁面 900

MASSIVE OBSTETRIC HAEMORRHAgE 879
Massive obstetric haemorrhage
At term, the gravid uterus receives 10– 20% of the CO and when haem-
orrhage occurs, blood loss can be rapid. In the developing world, haem-
orrhage is the leading cause of maternal death. ‘Normal’ blood loss after
vaginal delivery is of the order of 250– 400mL and around 500– 1000mL
after CS. Blood loss is usually underestimated.
Although various definitions have been proposed for massive haem-
orrhage, acute blood loss of >1000mL should prompt full resuscitation
measures. Beware of women with low body weight where any loss can
proportionally be more significant.
Protocols for major haemorrhage should be available in every delivery
suite and training should include team simulation drills. Patients with risk
factors for bleeding should be actively managed, including counselling re-
garding place of delivery, pre- emptive IV access and active management of
the 3rd stage. Antenatal iron deficiency anaemia, which affects more than
a third of pregnancies; is associated with increased bleeding at delivery and
should be treated with supplementation. Consider IV iron for women who
fail to respond to PO iron.
Aetiology of obstetric haemorrhage
Antenatal
• Placental abruption. Bleeding is often associated with pain. Blood loss
may be concealed with retroplacental bleeding. Fetal compromise is
common. While small bleeds may be treated conservatively, significant
bleeds have a fetal mortality as high as 35%.
• Placenta praevia/ accreta (see % pp. 884–5). Usually associated with
small, painless bleeds, but bleeding may be catastrophic.
• Uterine rupture. Fetal distress is almost universal. Usually happens in the
presence of a previous uterine scar and is classically said to be painful,
but painless dehiscence can occur.
Postnatal: the four ‘T’s
Tone
Uterine atony is associated with chorioamnionitis, long labour and uterine
distension (e.g. polyhydramnios, multiple gestation). Uterine inversion is a
rare complication and is also associated with atony. To enable resiting of the
uterus paradoxically further tocolysis may be required. After the uterus is
resited, uterotonics should be given.
Tissue
Retained placentas can cause massive haemorrhage, but often bleeding
is minimal. Retained products of conception are the leading cause of late
haemorrhage.
Trauma
genital tract trauma can cause significant blood loss. Surgical control is usu-
ally achievable. Significant retroperitoneal haematomas, while rare, may be
extensive and life- threatening.
Thrombin
The risk of haemorrhage is increased by any factor that reduces the efficacy
of coagulation. AFE and abruption are the two commonest obstetric causes
of hypofibrinogenaemia.


## 頁面 901

880
880 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of haemorrhage is usually self- evident, although concealed
bleeding can occur, especially with placental abruptions. In addition, signs
of cardiovascular decompensation may be delayed, as women are usu-
ally young and fit and start with a pregnancy-i nduced expansion of their
intravascular volume. Beware the woman with cold peripheries—t his is ab-
normal in pregnancy. Hypotension is a late and worrying sign.
Management
• In the event of a major haemorrhage requiring surgery, do not delay
operation until X-m atched blood is available.
• Clear communication with the patient, relatives and other members of
the health care team is vital.
• Ongoing blood loss calculation should be contemporaneously
communicated between team members and recorded.
• Call for help. Senior anaesthetic and surgical staff should be present.
Blood transfusion services should be alerted.
• Follow ABC principles.
• give supplemental O. If laryngeal reflexes are obtunded, intubate and
2
ventilate.
• In antenatal patients, avoid aortocaval compression.
• Insert two 14g cannulae and take blood for X- matching, FBC and
clotting screen, including fibrinogen. Bedside measurements of Hb,
lactate and clotting, when available, are very useful, but a single normal
bedside Hb estimate in the face of acute massive bleeding should not
delay giving of blood.
• Fluid resuscitate initially with crystalloid (ideally warmed).
• If required, give group O rhesus- negative blood (i.e. ongoing blood loss
of 2– 3L and/ or the presence of ECg abnormalities).
• Start appropriate monitoring. Urine output and invasive monitoring of
central venous and arterial pressures may be indicated, depending on
rate of blood loss and maternal condition. However, early monitoring
of CVP is not essential, as hypotension is almost always due to
hypovolaemia.
• Treat the cause of haemorrhage (see below).
• If surgery is required:
• Do not perform CNB if the patient is hypovolaemic.
• Beware coagulopathies in the presence of concealed abruption.
• With continuing haemorrhage, further equipment, including warming
devices and rapid transfusion devices and lines, should be available.
Temperature should be monitored and optimised to aid coagulation.
• Fibrinogen is important and levels of <2.0g/ dL after 1L of blood
loss are associated with major haemorrhage. Aim to maintain
fibrinogen >2.0g/ dL. This can be done with fibrinogen concentrate or
cryoprecipitate. Two pools of cryoprecipitate will increase fibrinogen
concentration by 71.0g/ dL, depending on the rate of consumption.
FFP, although containing some fibrinogen, may not be able to elevate
fibrinogen concentration above 2.0g/ dL, as plasma from non- pregnant
donors generally have fibrinogen concentrations below this level and so
may conversely contribute to dilution.13


## 頁面 902

MASSIVE OBSTETRIC HAEMORRHAgE 881
• goal-d irected therapy using bedside monitoring of coagulation
(TEg®/ ROTEM®) is used in some centres, following agreed treatment
algorithms.
• In the absence of clotting results, in cases where hypofibrinogenaemia
may be suspected (e.g. massive abruption, AFE), empiric use of
cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrates may be considered.
• If cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrates are not available, after 4
units of red cells and ongoing bleeding, give 715mL/k g of FFP. Larger
volumes may be required if the PT/ APTT ratio is >1.5.
• Platelets should be transfused to maintain a level of >75 × 109/ L.
• The antifibrinolytic agent tranexamic acid (1g slow IV repeated after
30min if bleeding continuing) has been shown to reduce death due
to bleeding from postpartum haemorrhage, with no increase in
complications. It should be given as soon as possible in haemorrhage of
over 1000mL.14
• Cell salvage use is now well established in obstetric practice. Although
most recent evidence shows no significant reduction in allogeneic
blood transfusion when used routinely during CS, it may be useful in
situations of haemorrhage or where haemorrhage is expected.15 To
reduce the reinfusion of fetal tissue, do not collect fluid that is rich
in amniotic fluid. The use of leucocyte depletion filters may reduce
contamination, although more recent data indicate the filtration process
alone is effective without the risk of filter- related bradykinin- mediated
hypotension and the increased processing time. With major rapid blood
loss, allogeneic blood will still be needed.
• During massive transfusion, calcium supplementation may be needed.
• Once blood loss has been controlled, before extubation, make sure the
patient is warm, has a normal lactate and is passing urine. Continue care
on HDU or ICU.
Specific treatment for haemorrhage
Think of the cause of the bleeding. Often treatment is surgical, by either
removing tissue or repairing trauma. Uterine atony can be treated with
uterotonics and, in some circumstances, can also be treated surgically with
uterine brace sutures. Applying direct pressure to the bleeding site can be
done manually, or with balloons or packs. Ultimately, hysterectomy may be
required to control bleeding.
• Firm bimanual pressure can temporarily control postpartum
haemorrhage due to uterine atony.
• Manual or mechanical, external or internal pressure on the aorta may
be lifesaving.
• Uterotonics can only be used in the postnatal period. A common
sequence is 2– 5 units oxytocin bolus, oxytocin infusion, ergometrine
500 micrograms slow IV or IM, carboprost 250 micrograms IM
repeated every 15min (max 2mg). There are contraindications to all
these agents, so consider the appropriate uterotonic on an individual
basis (see % p. 883).
• Uterine compression brace sutures (B- Lynch suture, etc.) may be
helpful.


## 頁面 903

882
882 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
• Intrauterine balloon tamponade (Bakri® balloons, Rusch balloons,
condom catheters, Sengstaken– Blakemore or Foley catheters have all
been advocated). Usually they are left in situ for up to 24h and then
deflated over a period of hours.
• Surgical ligation of blood vessels, direct pressure on bleeding points and
firm manual pressure can all help control blood loss, while a circulating
volume is re- established and/ or coagulopathy is corrected. Consider
leaving packs in situ and then re- exploring the abdomen 6– 24h later.
• Interventional radiology is especially useful when major haemorrhage
is anticipated. It may not reduce the incidence of Caesarean
hysterectomy but probably reduces blood loss. Balloon catheters can
be prophylactically placed in the anterior division of the internal iliac
vessels before delivery (and then inflated after delivery). Interventional
radiology can also be used during an unexpected major bleed, but
be very cautious of moving a patient to a radiology suite if they are
cardiovascularly unstable. The relative risk and benefit of interventional
radiology is still being assessed.
• Ultimately, hysterectomy may be required. The decision to perform a
hysterectomy should not be delayed until the patient is in extremis.


## 頁面 904

COMMONLy USED UTEROTONICS AND DOSES 883
Commonly used uterotonics and doses
There are substantial differences in the dose requirements, particularly of
oxytocin. In women undergoing elective CS, the dose of oxytocin required
to produce effective uterine contraction is substantially lower than for
intrapartum women. Either oxytocin or carbetocin can be used as 1st-l ine
drugs. Second- line drugs are either ergometrine or a prostaglandin.16 (See
Table 35.5.)
Table 35.5 Uterotonics
Drug Dose Comment
Oxytocin (e.g. 2– 5 Synthetic hormone causing
Syntocinon®) unit bolus uterine contraction and peripheral
30– 50 units vasodilation
in 500mL of 5 units can cause a temporary drop
crystalloid in systolic BP of 30%; tachycardia is
and titrated common. give slowly
as indicated Dose requirement for elective CS
is lower than that for intrapartum
women
Has mild ADH action
Carbetocin 100 micrograms Long-a cting analogue of oxytocin (half-
IV over 1min life 40min vs 5– 10min). Experience still
limited in pre- eclampsia, eclampsia and
epilepsy; manufacturer suggests to avoid
it in these groups.
Relatively expensive
Ergometrine 0.5mg IM or slow An ergot alkaloid derivative
IV injection Effective uterine constriction
Nausea and vomiting are very
common.
Systemic vasoconstriction may
produce dangerous hypertension;
avoid in at- risk groups (e.g. pre-
eclampsia and specific cardiac
diseases)
Carboprost (e.g. 0.25mgIM every Uterine constrictor
Hemabate®) 15min to a max Causes nausea, vomiting and
(15- methyl of 2mg diarrhoea. May produce pyrexia
prostaglandin F2α) and severe bronchospasm, alter
pulmonary shunt fraction and induce
hypoxia (caution in asthmatics)
Misoprostol 0.8– 1mg PR Uterine constrictor.
Same cautions as carboprost

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 35.5 Uterotonics |
| --- |
| Drug Dose Comment |
| Oxytocin (e.g. 2– 5 Synthetic hormone causing Syntocinon®) unit bolus uterine contraction and peripheral 30– 50 units vasodilation in 500mL of 5 units can cause a temporary drop crystalloid in systolic BP of 30%; tachycardia is and titrated common. give slowly as indicated Dose requirement for elective CS is lower than that for intrapartum women Has mild ADH action Carbetocin 100 micrograms Long-a cting analogue of oxytocin (half- IV over 1min life 40min vs 5– 10min). Experience still limited in pre- eclampsia, eclampsia and epilepsy; manufacturer suggests to avoid it in these groups. Relatively expensive Ergometrine 0.5mg IM or slow An ergot alkaloid derivative IV injection Effective uterine constriction Nausea and vomiting are very common. Systemic vasoconstriction may produce dangerous hypertension; avoid in at- risk groups (e.g. pre- eclampsia and specific cardiac diseases) Carboprost (e.g. 0.25mgIM every Uterine constrictor Hemabate®) 15min to a max Causes nausea, vomiting and (15- methyl of 2mg diarrhoea. May produce pyrexia prostaglandin F2α) and severe bronchospasm, alter pulmonary shunt fraction and induce hypoxia (caution in asthmatics) Misoprostol 0.8– 1mg PR Uterine constrictor. Same cautions as carboprost |
|  |


## 頁面 905

884
884 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Placenta praevia and accreta
Placenta praevia
The term placenta praevia is used when the placenta partially or completely
covers the internal os, and ‘low-l ying’ describes when the placenta sits
within 20mm of it. A low- lying placenta resolves in many cases as the lower
segment of the uterus develops during pregnancy. Diagnosis is usually made
by ultrasound. Repeat ultrasounds are offered for assessment nearer term.
The incidence is 71:200 pregnancies, but higher with previous uterine scars
and multiparity.
Obstetric management usually involves preserving the pregnancy until the
36th gestational week. The risk of haemorrhage increases rapidly after this.
Premature labour, bleeding or fetal distress may necessitate earlier delivery.
If at 36w gestation, a vaginal delivery is not possible, a CS is performed.
Patients with placenta praevia are at risk of haemorrhage: firstly because
the lower uterine segment does not contract as effectively as the body of
the uterus, so after separation of the placenta, the placental bed may con-
tinue to bleed following delivery; secondly because the obstetrician may
have to divide the placenta at LSCS to deliver the fetus; thirdly because
the placenta may have grown into the uterine wall (placenta accreta—
see below), preventing the placenta from separating and the uterus from
contracting.
Three questions can be used to evaluate the implications of placenta
praevia:
• Is a vaginal delivery possible? This is unlikely if the placenta extends to
within 2cm of the os, especially if the fetal head is not engaged in the
pelvis.
• If not, does the placenta cover the anterior lower segment of the
uterus? If it does, the obstetrician may have to divide the placenta at
LSCS to deliver the fetus and increased blood loss is likely.
• Is there a uterine scar from previous surgery? Placenta accreta is more
common if the placenta overlies a uterine scar and the risk of significant
haemorrhage increases further.
Placenta accreta, increta and percreta
Placenta accreta occurs when the placenta implants abnormally into the
uterine wall.
• In placenta accreta, the placenta grows through the endometrium to
the myometrium.
• In placenta increta, the placenta grows into the myometrium.
• In placenta percreta, the placenta invades through the myometrium into
the uterine serosa and surrounding structures.17
The endometrium usually provides a cleavage plane between the placenta
and the myometrium. Because this plane is absent, the placenta fails to sep-
arate from the uterus post- delivery and uterine contraction is impaired.
This can result in life-t hreatening haemorrhage. The risk of haemorrhage
increases sequentially with placenta accreta, increta and percreta.
The incidence of accreta is rising, possibly because of the increasing num-
bers of CS. The risk of an adherent placenta increases with the number
of uterine scars. With three uterine scars and an overlying placenta, the
chance of an accreta is 40%, increasing to 61% and 67% with four or five


## 頁面 906

PLACENTA PRAEVIA AND ACCRETA 885
scars respectively. Previous uterine surgery, the presence of uterine fi-
broids and previous uterine compression sutures are also associated with
placenta accreta. Diagnosis of percreta may be made by ultrasound, but if
still equivocal, MRI may be helpful. However, placenta accreta and increta
are often diagnosed at surgery.
Anaesthetic management
• Anaesthetic management is dictated by the likelihood of major
haemorrhage, maternal preference and experience of the team.
• Although the sympathectomy that occurs with CNB may make control
of BP more difficult, practical experience shows that CNB can be safely
used for placenta praevia, providing the patient is normovolaemic
before starting. However, if significant haemorrhage does occur,
hypotensive and bleeding patients require reassurance which may divert
the anaesthetist’s attention and the experience is unlikely to be pleasant
for the mother.
• CNB anaesthesia should therefore only be undertaken by experienced
anaesthetists with additional help available. If CNB anaesthesia is
considered appropriate, mothers should be warned that a gA may be
required, usually in the first 10min after delivery.
• If intubation is anticipated to be difficult, it should be undertaken at
the start of the operation, so that the anaesthetist is not dealing with
bleeding and a difficult intubation at the same time.
• For bleeding patients, a gA is the preferred choice.
Technique
• Experienced obstetricians and anaesthetists are essential.
• Interventional radiology may be considered (see % pp. 881–2).
• Two to 8 units of blood should be X- matched, depending on
the anticipated risk of haemorrhage, and equipment for massive
haemorrhage must be present.
• Cell salvage should be used if available (see % pp. 458–9).
• Obstetric staff experienced in Caesarean hysterectomy should be
immediately available.
• Two 14g cannulae should be inserted.
• If CNB anaesthesia is used, a CSE may offer advantages as the surgery
may be prolonged.
• Have a selection of uterotonics to hand. Even if massive haemorrhage is
not encountered, an oxytocin infusion is advantageous.
• If massive bleeding does occur, follow massive obstetric haemorrhage
guidelines (see % pp. 879–82). Remember hysterectomy may be the
only method of controlling bleeding. Excessive delay in making this
decision may jeopardise maternal life. Close communication with the
surgical team is crucial.
• Even if no significant bleeding occurred intraoperatively, continue to
observe closely in the postnatal period as haemorrhage may still occur.


## 頁面 907

886
886 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Amniotic fluid embolism
AFE is recognised by the abrupt onset, during labour, delivery or immedi-
ately postpartum, of hypoxia, cardiovascular collapse (usually right heart
failure initially, followed by left heart failure and pulmonary oedema), seiz-
ures or DIC.18,19 It is thought to be caused by fetal tissue entering maternal
circulation and causing abnormal activation of immunological mechanisms.
Because the diagnosis is commonly one of exclusion, the estimate of the
incidence varies considerably but is of the order of 1:12 000 to 1:40 000
deliveries, with a mortality of 10– 40%.
• AFE is associated with:
• Age >35y
• Multiparous women
• Obstructed labour, particularly associated with uterine stimulants
• Multiple pregnancies
• Short labours
• Operative deliveries.
• AFE should be considered if any of the following occurs in the absence
of other potential causes:
• Sudden collapse with acute hypotension and fetal distress
• Pulmonary oedema (>90% of cases) and cyanosis (80%)
• Coagulopathy (80%)— fibrinogen commonly falls precipitously;
remember that haemorrhage may be concealed
• Seizures (50%)
• Cardiac arrest (occurs in nearly 90% of severe cases).
Care with the use of uterine stimulants and timely diagnosis of obstructed
labour may help to reduce the incidence.
Once AFE has occurred, treatment is purely supportive:
• ABC
• Senior staff should be present
• Maternal and fetal survival are dependent on early delivery of the fetus:
• Alert haematology and activate the major haemorrhage plan.
• Hypofibrinogenaemia is very common in AFE. Measure coagulation
profile regularly. If bedside measurement of clotting is not available
(TEg® or ROTEM®), consider giving prophylactic cryoprecipitate or
fibrinogen concentrate and platelets.
• ICU will be required for those who survive the initial insult.


## 頁面 908

OBESITy AND PREgNANCy 887
Obesity and pregnancy
(See also % pp. 70–81.)
In high- income countries, obesity is increasing. Adult obesity prevalence
in England has almost doubled between 1993 and 2019.20
Maternal obesity is a major risk factor for death from thromboembolic
disease and cardiac disease. It is also associated with gestational diabetes,
pre- eclampsia, postpartum haemorrhage, wound infections, operative de-
liveries and shoulder dystocia. Fetal effects include an increased incidence
of miscarriage, neural tube defects, macrosomia and admission to neonatal
intensive care.
Anaesthetic concerns include difficult IV access, difficulty in performing
CNB techniques, a propensity for desaturation due to a combination of
reduced FRC and i O consumption, an i difficulty in intubation and high
2
inflation pressures. OSA can develop or be made worse by pregnancy.
Management is geared to reviewing women in the antenatal period, as-
sessing the level of risk, especially if gA is required, and having a plan docu-
mented in the patient’s notes.
In many units, a BMI of 40 at booking is the cut- off for reviewing women
in an anaesthetic antenatal clinic, although internationally, recommenda-
tions vary from BMI >30 to BMI >45.
Key points to consider are:
• Is intubation or gA likely to be problematic?
• If yes, women should be encouraged to have an epidural early in labour
and they should be warned that in the event of a gA, there may be
delay to ensure that a senior anaesthetic team is present. This delay
may have implications for the fetal health if fetal distress is present.
• There should be a written plan documenting who needs to be
present for an anaesthetic.21 In general, this should be a senior
anaesthetist, but individual assessment should be made. One or even
two consultants may be required for some individuals.
• Are the lumbar spinous processes palpable?
• It is harder to site epidurals in larger women, with failure of epidural
analgesia reported to be up to 25%. There is also an i risk of dural
puncture if the depth to the epidural space is >6cm. When the
spinous processes are difficult to palpate, it is more likely that CNB
will be difficult.
• Advise women of the advantage of an early epidural. This allows
time for senior anaesthetists to be summoned and for resiting if the
epidural fails.
• There should be written guidance as to who should site the epidural.
• Some centres recommend ultrasound to assist in siting epidurals.
However, experience is needed. If ultrasound is used, having the
probe in a longitudinal orientation gives a more accurate prediction of
the depth to the epidural space than when the probe is transverse.
• Do patients suffer from sleep apnoea?
• If so, are they using CPAP machines? If they do, remind patients to
bring their CPAP machine to the delivery suite.
• Look for signs of right heart failure (ECg/ echocardiography as
indicated).
• Remember these patients may become very sedated by opioids.
Especially in the event of a gA, think about whether HDU care is
needed postoperatively.


## 頁面 909

888
888 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
• Is venous access likely to be difficult?
• If so, early venous access should be obtained. Ultrasound may be of
assistance. Very rarely, central venous lines may be needed.
• At the antenatal visit, some discussion about limiting weight gain in
pregnancy and weight loss after pregnancy may be helpful but needs to
be done diplomatically.
Consideration should also go into the equipment available in the delivery
suite, maternity theatres and maternity wards. Most units have the appro-
priate BP cuffs, theatre tables, lateral transfer equipment such as hover mat-
tresses and a selection of airway devices. Some units use ramps to position
patients on theatre tables. Many units do not have the appropriate hoists,
wide wheelchairs and seated scales for the supermorbidly obese.
When admitted in labour, make sure that all members of the team are
aware of the plan and that appropriate equipment is to hand.
• If an operative procedure is required, remember that epidural and, to a
lesser extent, spinal anaesthesia will often spread higher than expected.
Watch blocks as they develop very closely and divide epidural top-u ps
into small aliquots.
• If a gA is required, consider HFNO as part of the preoxygenation
process. Be very careful to optimise maternal position. Consider steep
head- up position at both intubation and extubation.
• Make sure that appropriate airway equipment is immediately to hand.
• Make sure that the surgical team for operative procedures is also
appropriately senior.
• Beware a large panniculus (excessive fatty tissue in the lower abdomen).
This can worsen aortocaval occlusion and make surgery very difficult.
Sometimes, rather than reflecting the panniculus, the surgical incision is
performed above it.
• Remember that recovery for these individuals, especially those with
sleep apnoea, is potentially dangerous. Think about the appropriate site
and level of observation required.


## 頁面 910

MATERNAL SEPSIS 889
Maternal sepsis
Maternal sepsis is a life-t hreatening condition defined as organ dysfunction
resulting from infection during pregnancy, childbirth, post-a bortion or the
postpartum period and accounts for 15% of maternal deaths worldwide.
The pathophysiology remains incompletely understood, but sepsis is asso-
ciated with a dysregulated host response to infection. Organ dysfunction
can be considered to be an acute increase in the Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment (SOFA) score by ≥2 points and reflects an overall mortality risk
of 710% in a general hospital population with suspected infection.22 Patients
with suspected sepsis can be stratified as high risk using the qSOFA (a quick
SOFA or ‘HAT’) which is two or more of:
• Hypotension: systolic BP ≤100mmHg
• Altered mental status: any gCS <15
• Tachypnoea: RR ≥22.
• Septic shock is defined as sepsis with a vasopressor requirement to
maintain a MAP >65mmHg plus a lactate level >2mmol/L in the
absence of hypovolaemia.23
• Maternal deaths are often associated with a failure to recognise
sepsis quickly and inadequate or inappropriate early treatment. Early
recognition and treatment of the signs and symptoms of maternal sepsis
are crucial.
• Recognition of sepsis may not be easy. Use of ‘track and trigger’
systems, such as Modified Early Obstetric Warning Scoring (MEOWS)
charts, is recommended. Pregnancy causes modulation of the immune
system to accept foreign proteins and this increases the risk of infection.
Remember women can appear well, despite widespread inflammation.
Usually HR, BP, temperature and/ or RR give an indication of early
stages of sepsis. Once suspected, a key element to the management is
early review by a senior doctor and instigation of urgent management
and resuscitation.
• Some or all of the following may be present:
• Temperature >38°C or <36°C. Hypothermia is a significant finding
that may indicate severe infection
• Persistent HR >100bpm
• Tachypnoea (RR >22 breaths/ min)
• Leucopenia or leucocytosis (WCC <4 × 109/ L or >12 × 109/ L)
• Sore throat, flu- like symptoms or a productive cough
• Diarrhoea and/ or vomiting
• Abdominal, pelvic or loin pain
• Premature rupture of membranes ± offensive vaginal discharge
(offensive suggests anaerobes; serosanguinous suggests streptococcal
infection)
• Abnormal or absent fetal heartbeat
• Rash
• Impaired mental state/ confusion/ lethargy
• Headache/ neck stiffness
• Urinary symptoms
• Wound infection: spreading cellulitis or discharge


## 頁面 911

890
890 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
• Hypotension
• Arterial hypoxaemia
• Raised lactate
• Acute oliguria (urinary output <0.5mL/ kg/ h)
• Deranged renal function
• Deranged liver function
• Altered mental status
• Coagulation abnormalities
• Hyperglycaemia in the absence of DM.
Management of patients with suspected/ confirmed sepsis
• Management of sepsis is aimed at stabilising the patient while diagnosing
and treating the underlying cause. Treatment is more likely to be
effective if appropriate therapy is started early.
• A multidisciplinary team approach is required and should include
obstetricians, midwives, anaesthetists, microbiologists and critical
care staff. Critically ill patients should be cared for in level 2 or 3
facilities with the capability for invasive techniques of monitoring and
experienced nursing/ midwifery staff.
• A protocoled approach is recommended for early resuscitation with
goal- directed treatment.
• While the ‘sepsis six’ is no longer the sole goal, following its principles
remains useful for early treatment. Within 1h, aim to achieve:
• O therapy (maintain saturations >94%)
2
• Bloods, blood cultures and septic screen
• IV antibiotics
• Fluid therapy
• ABg (monitoring pH and lactate)
• Continuous monitoring, including urine output.
• Reassess the patient regularly; involve critical care as necessary and
ensure the consultant obstetrician and anaesthetists are informed and
updated. Source control should also be considered a priority.


## 頁面 912

CARDIAC DISEASE AND PREgNANCy 891
Cardiac disease and pregnancy
(See also % Chapter 5.)
Cardiac disease remains the leading cause of maternal death in the UK.24
Cardiomyopathies and IHD are each responsible for 725% of the total
deaths, with sudden arrhythmic death and aortic dissection making up
another 25%. Valvular disease accounts for a little under 10% of cardiac
deaths.
Pregnancy and labour present a significant cardiac stress to women. As
a generality, if women are symptomatic with minimal activity before preg-
nancy, particularly if symptomatic at rest, the course of pregnancy is likely
to be stormy, with mortality of the order of 20– 30%. Prepregnancy coun-
selling is crucial in high- risk individuals.
Pregnancy is not recommended in women with the following:
• Pulmonary arterial hypertension
• Severe ventricular dysfunction (EF <30% or NyHA classes III– IV)
• Previous peripartum cardiomyopathy with residual impairment
• Severe MS or severe symptomatic AS
• Systemic RV with moderate/ severely reduced function
• Severe aortic dilation or severe (re- )coarctation
• Vascular Ehler– Danlos syndrome
• Fontan with any complication.
general management is covered in this section as an outline only—e ach
patient should have an individualised plan; assess early and involve a multi-
disciplinary team consisting of a combination of obstetricians, anaesthetists,
cardiologists, midwives and neonatologists. Investigations should be per-
formed as indicated. The risk to the fetus from procedures such as chest
radiographs is minimal.
Have a written plan for the delivery and ask the woman to keep a copy
on her at all times.
• Consider site (ranging from a normal delivery suite to a cardiac
theatre in a tertiary centre) and modality of delivery. Is vaginal delivery
acceptable? Is epidural analgesia indicated? Should pushing in the
2nd stage be limited? With each condition, consider the effects of
vasodilation, vasoconstriction and positive and negative inotropic
and chronotropic agents. Have written guidance on the acceptability
of CNB analgesia/ anaesthesia or gA, as well as the use of oxytocin
(potent vasodilator) and ergometrine (potent vasoconstrictor). Think
about the appropriate treatment for hypotension.
• Consider anticoagulation. Patients with mechanical heart valves are at
high risk in pregnancy. Warfarin, despite its known teratogenicity, is the
anticoagulant of choice for women with mechanical heart valves if the
daily dose is <5mg/ day.
• In most situations, rapid changes in pre- or afterload should be avoided,
so always use oxytocin with extreme caution and preferably only as an
infusion.
• Expect the period of highest risk to be in the 1– 2h post- delivery
(vasoactive uterotonics are given; there is unpredictable blood loss and
unpredictable volume of autotransfusion and CO usually peaks).
• Continue management on ICU if appropriate


## 頁面 913

892
892 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
General considerations for specific conditions
• Pulmonary hypertension has a very high maternal mortality.
• Fixed CO states— avoid sudden changes in afterload.
• Cyanotic heart lesions (i.e. right- to- left shunts) will not tolerate
reductions in SVR; nevertheless, epidural analgesia is sometimes used to
minimise the stress of labour. Onset of analgesia must be slow, and use
phenylephrine to maintain afterload. gA is probably the technique of
choice for CS.
• AS may become symptomatic during pregnancy. Serial
echocardiography is often used. gA or slow- onset CNB have both
been advocated for CS. The technique is probably less important than
the skill with which it is applied. Avoid tachycardia and reduction in
afterload. Loss of sinus rhythm should be treated promptly.
• Valvular insufficiencies are usually well tolerated during pregnancy.
• Women with symptomatic Marfan’s disease (particularly if the aortic
root is dilated >50mm or 27mm/ m2 body surface area) or type 4
(vascular) Ehlers– Danlos syndrome have a high risk of aortic dissection.
They are usually maintained on β- blockers. Unexplained severe chest
pain is an indication for CXR and echocardiography.
• MI during pregnancy has 20% mortality. Infarction occurs most
commonly in the 3rd trimester. If possible, delivery should be delayed
at least 3w after infarction. Both elective CS and vaginal delivery have
been advocated. In either case, cardiac stress should be minimised with
effective analgesia.
• Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a dilated cardiomyopathy that occurs
between the last month of pregnancy and 5mo postpartum. The
diagnosis is based on echocardiography and is a diagnosis of exclusion.
The incidence has marked geographic variation, ranging from 1:100
in parts of Nigeria to 1:4000 in the US. Estimates of mortality range
from 7% to 50%. The treatment should be multidisciplinary, with
the expectation of severe LV dysfunction. Bromocriptine may be
used to stop lactation and enhance LV recovery, but is controversial.
The cardiomyopathy can recur and if the cardiomyopathy did not
completely resolve, the mortality in subsequent pregnancies is very high.
Preconceptual counselling is crucial.


## 頁面 914

SURgERy DURINg PREgNANCy 893
Surgery during pregnancy
One to 2% of women require incidental surgery during pregnancy.
Remember that although various fetal risks (such as fetal loss, premature
labour, low birthweight (LBW) and teratogenicity) are attributed to surgery
during pregnancy, fetal wellbeing is intimately tied to maternal wellbeing. In
general, what is good for the mother is good for the fetus.
General considerations
• When possible, delay surgery until the postnatal period or alternatively
into the 2nd trimester, when teratogenic risks to the fetus are reduced
(the fetus is at greatest risk of major teratogenesis during the first 12w
of gestation). Risks must be discussed (including miscarriage) with the
patient and documented.
• Make sure that the obstetric team are aware that surgery is planned.
• Remember gastric acid and VTE prophylaxis. Pregnant women are
hypercoagulable from the 1st trimester.25,26
• Consider regional anaesthesia. The combination of a mother
maintaining her own airway together with minimal fetal drug exposure
is desirable. However, data demonstrating that regional anaesthesia is
safer than gA are lacking.
• In asymptomatic women with no other indication for intubation, it is
acceptable not to perform an RSI up to 18w gestation. However, be
aware that lower oesophageal sphincter tone is reduced within the first
few weeks of pregnancy and intra- abdominal pressure rises in the 2nd
trimester. Use RSI if patients are symptomatic or have additional risk
factors for regurgitation.
• Every effort must be made to maintain normal maternal physiological
parameters throughout the perioperative period.
• From the 20th week of gestation, use left lateral tilt to reduce
aortocaval compression. Uterine blood flow may be compromised in
the supine position.
• Light anaesthesia is associated with increased catecholamine release,
which reduces placental blood flow.
• The tocolytic effect of inhalational agents is advantageous.
• Fetal monitoring may be beneficial. In general, in the UK, fetal HR is
monitored pre- and post- surgery, but not intraoperatively.
• Treat haemorrhage and avoid hypovolaemia and anaemia which impact
on fetal oxygenation.
• The 1° risk to the fetus is premature labour in the postoperative period.
Detection and suppression of premature labour are vital. Women
should be told to report sensations of uterine contractions so that
appropriate tocolytic therapy can be instituted.
• Effective postoperative analgesia is required to reduce maternal
catecholamine secretion. Regional analgesia with LA agents may be
preferential. Simple analgesics such as paracetamol and codeine can be
used. NSAIDs should be avoided.


## 頁面 915

894
894 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Teratogenicity
The fetus is at greatest risk of major teratogenesis during the period of or-
ganogenesis, predominantly in the first 12w of gestation. However, minor
abnormalities may occur after this. Causes of teratogenicity are diverse,
including infection, pyrexia, hypoxia and acidosis, as well as the better rec-
ognised hazards of drugs and radiation. Establishing whether drugs are ter-
atogens can be difficult. Current information on the risk of exposure to
many medications (but excluding most anaesthetic agents) can be found
at the UK Teratology Information Service (M http:// www.uktis.org) or
the European Network of Teratology Information Services (ENTIS) (M
https:// www.entis- org.eu).
Premedication
• Benzodiazepine exposure just before delivery may cause neonatal
drowsiness and hypotonia. Case reports associating benzodiazepines
with cleft lip formation have not been substantiated and a single dose
has never been associated with teratogenicity. Chronic administration
may cause neonatal withdrawal symptoms post- delivery.
• Ranitidine and omeprazole are not known to be harmful.
Induction agents
• Thiopental. Clinical experience with thiopental suggests that this is a
very safe drug to use.
• Propofol is safe to use during CS at term, but use in early pregnancy has
not been formally investigated, although it is not teratogenic in animal
studies.
• Etomidate is an inhibitor of cortisol synthesis, and if used for CS,
neonates have reduced cortisol concentrations. It is not teratogenic in
animal studies.
• Ketamine should be avoided in early pregnancy as it increases
intrauterine pressure, resulting in fetal asphyxia. This increase in
intrauterine pressure is not apparent in the 3rd trimester.
Inhalational agents
• Halogenated inhalational agents have been used extensively in
pregnancy and are safe. While theoretical concern has been expressed
about an increase in neuroapoptosis with these agents, a single
relatively short exposure is unlikely to have negative effects.27 At
high concentrations, maternal BP and CO fall, resulting in a significant
reduction in uterine blood flow. These agents also cause uterine
relaxation, which may be beneficial.
• Despite early concerns, epidemiological studies suggest that NO is
2
safe. However, given that anaesthesia can be easily delivered without
NO, it is sensible to avoid this agent.
2
• Muscle relaxants: because these agents are not lipophilic, only very small
quantities cross the placenta and so fetal exposure is limited. These
agents are safe to use.
• Anticholinesterase inhibitors: these agents are highly ionised and so, like
muscle relaxants, do not readily cross the placenta and are safe to use.
Chronic use of pyridostigmine to treat myasthenia gravis may cause
premature labour.


## 頁面 916

SURgERy DURINg PREgNANCy 895
Analgesics
• Opioids readily cross the placenta, but brief exposure is safe. Long-
term exposure will cause symptoms of withdrawal when the fetus
is delivered. Animal studies suggest possible fetal teratogenicity if
prolonged hypercapnia or impaired feeding develop as side effects of
opioid exposure.
• Chronic exposure to NSAIDs in early pregnancy may be associated
with increased fetal loss and in the 3rd trimester may cause premature
closure of the ductus arteriosus and persistent pulmonary hypertension
of the newborn. Single doses are unlikely to be harmful.
• Bupivacaine and lidocaine are safe. When used near delivery,
bupivacaine has no significant neonatal neurobehavioural effects, while
lidocaine may have a mild effect. Cocaine abuse during pregnancy
increases fetal loss and may increase the incidence of abnormalities in
the genitourinary tract.
Antiemetics
• Concern has been expressed about an association between chronic
exposure to ondansetron during the 1st trimester and cleft lip. Where
possible, ondansetron should be avoided in the 1st trimester; however,
single doses are unlikely to increase risk significantly.


## 頁面 917

896
896 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
Cervical cerclage (cervical stitch)
(See % p. 893 for surgery during pregnancy.)
Procedure Surgical treatment of incompetent cervical os
Time 20min
Pain +
Position Lithotomy
Blood loss Nil
Technique Spinal, epidural or gA
Cervical cerclage is performed to prevent premature cervical dilation and
loss of fetus (usually in 2nd trimester). It is one of the commonest surgical
procedures during pregnancy. Causes of an incompetent cervix include:
congenital abnormalities, cervical scarring/ surgery and hormonal imbal-
ance. Usually performed between 14w and 26w gestation, rarely precon-
ception. Emergency cerclage may be required in the face of a dilating cervix
and bulging membranes, although this is less successful than prophylactic
cerclage.
Type of surgery
• Transvaginal procedures are commonest (Shirodkar and McDonald
procedures). They require anaesthesia for insertion but can be removed
by obstetricians at around the 38th week gestation without anaesthetic.
• The transabdominal procedure requires two operations, one for
insertion and another for a CS for delivery and removal of the suture. It
also carries a greater risk of ureteric involvement.
Preoperative
• The risks of cerclage include membrane rupture (more common if the
membranes are already bulging), infection, haemorrhage and inducing
premature labour.
• As per surgery during pregnancy.
Perioperative
• Both CNB and gA may be used.
• If gA is used and uterine relaxation is required to allow bulging
membranes to be reduced, the halogenated vapour concentration
can be increased.
• For regional anaesthesia, a T8– T10 level is required for intraoperative
comfort. If uterine relaxation is required, 2– 3 puffs of sublingual gTN
spray may be used and repeated as necessary, although transient
hypotension is to be expected.
Postoperative
• As per surgery during pregnancy.


## 頁面 918

MATERNAL RESUSCITATION 897
Maternal resuscitation
Maternal cardiac arrest is fortunately rare. All the normal resuscitation drugs
should be used as indicated and defibrillation is safe for the fetus. Adrenaline
is also the drug of choice in major anaphylactic reactions. Severe hypoten-
sion associated with anaphylaxis results in very poor fetal outcomes.
The basic algorithms for adult resuscitation (see % pp. 1052–7) are ap-
propriate for maternal resuscitation, with several important differences:
• After 20w gestation, attempts must be made to minimise aortocaval
obstruction while performing effective cardiac compressions. The
fetus can be displaced with firm lateral pressure (manual uterine
displacement).
• After 4min, if CO has not been re- established, the fetus should be
delivered. This improves the chance of maternal, as well as fetal,
survival.
• Pregnant women have reduced oesophageal sphincter tone and both
cricoid pressure and intubation should be performed as early as
possible.
Consideration should be given to the diagnosis and treatment of obstetric
causes of maternal arrest, including:
• Cardiac events
• Intracranial events
• Sepsis
• Haemorrhage
• PE
• AFE
• Iatrogenic events:
• Hypermagnesaemia: treat with 10mL of 10% calcium chloride or
gluconate
• High or total spinal (which is the commonest cause of maternal
cardiac arrest on delivery suites in the UK)28— supportive treatment
• LA- induced arrhythmia— treat with 20% lipid emulsion (see %
pp. 1092–3).
References
1 Association of Anaesthetists (2013>). Regional anaesthesia and patients with abnormalities
of coagulation. M https:// anaesthetists.org/ Home/ Resources- publications/ guidelines/
Regional- anaesthesia- and- patients- with- abnormalities- of- coagulation
2 Chau A, Bibbo C, Huang CC, et al. (2017). Dural puncture epidural technique improves labor
analgesia quality with fewer side effects compared with epidural and combined spinal epidural
techniques: a randomized clinical trial. Anesth Analg, 124, 560– 9.
3 Cook TM, Counsell D, Wildsmith JAW (2009). Major complications of central neuraxial block:
report on the Third National Audit Project of the Royal College of Anaesthetists. Br J Anaesth,
102, 179– 90.
4 Russell R, Laxton C, Lucas DN, et al. (2019). Treatment of obstetric post-d ural puncture head-
ache. Part 1: conservative and pharmacological management. Int J Obstet Anesth, 38, 93– 103.
5 Russell R, Laxton C, Lucas DN, et al. (2019). Treatment of obstetric post-d ural puncture head-
ache. Part 2: epidural blood patch. Int J Obstet Anesth, 38, 104– 18.
6 Ronel I, Weiniger CF (2019). Non-r egional anaesthesia for labour: remifentanil in obstetrics. BJA
Educ, 19, 357– 61.
7 Kinsella SM, Carvalho B, Dyer RA, et al. (2018). International consensus statement on the man-
agement of hypotension with vasopressors during caesarean section under spinal anaesthesia.
Anaesthesia, 73, 71– 92.
8 Kinsella SM, Winton AL, Mushambi MC, et al. (2015). Failed tracheal intubation during obstetric
general anaesthesia: a literature review. Int J Obstet Anesth, 24, 356– 74.
9 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2015, updated 2019). Preterm labour and birth.
NICE guideline [Ng25]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng25


## 頁面 919

898
898 CHAPTER 35 Obstetric anaesthesia and analgesia
10 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2019). Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis and
management. NICE guideline [Ng133]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng133
11 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016). PIGF- based testing to help diagnose
suspected pre- eclampsia. Diagnostics guidance [Dg23]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/
dg23
12 Pollock W, Peek MJ, Wang A, et al. (2020). Eclampsia in Australia and New Zealand: a pro-
spective population- based study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol, 60, 533– 40. M https:// obgyn.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/ doi/ abs/ 10.1111/ ajo.13100
13 Collis R, Collins PW (2015). Haemostatic management of obstetric haemorrhage. Anaesthesia,
70 (suppl 1), 78– 86.
14 Shakur H, Roberts I, Fawole B, et al.; WOMAN Trial Collaborators (2017). Effect of early tran-
examic acid administration on mortality, hysterectomy, and other morbidities in women with
post- partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an international, randomised, double- blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet, 389, 2105– 16.
15 Khan KS, Moore PAS, Wilson MJ, et al. (2017). Cell salvage and donor blood transfusion during
cesarean section: A pragmatic, multicentre randomised controlled trial (SALVO). PLoS Med,
14:e1002471. M https:// doi.org/ 10.1371/ journal.pmed.1002471
16 Heesen M, Carvalho B, Carvalho JCA, et al. (2019). International consensus statement on the use
of uterotonic agents during Caesarean section. Anaesthesia, 74, 1305– 19.
17 goh W, Zalud I (2016). Placenta accreta: diagnosis, management and the molecular biology of
the morbidly adherent placenta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med, 29, 1795– 800.
18 Benson MD (2017). Amniotic fluid embolism mortality rate. J Obstet Gynaecol Res, 43, 1714– 18.
19 Shamshirsaz AA, Clark SL (2016). Amniotic fluid embolism. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am, 43,
779– 90.
20 Baker C (2021). Obesity statistics. House of Commons Library. Briefing Paper Number 3336,
January 2021. M https:// commonslibrary.parliament.uk/ research- briefings/ sn03336/
21. Denison FC, Aedla NR, Keag O, et al.; Royal College of Obstetricians and gynaecologists.
(2018). Care of women with obesity in pregnancy: green-t op guideline No. 72. BJOG, 126,
e62– 106.
22 Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW (2016). The Third International Consensus Definitions
for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis- 3). JAMA, 315, 801– 10.
23 Shankar- Hari M, Phillips gS, Levy ML, et al. (2016). Developing a new definition and assessing
new clinical criteria for septic shock: for the Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis
and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3 ). JAMA, 315, 775– 87.
24 Knight M, Clarke B, Head C, et al. (2019). Lessons on cardiovascular care. In: Knight M, Bunch K,
Tuffnell D, et al. (eds) on behalf of MBRRACE- UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care— Lessons
learned to inform maternity care from the UK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths
and Morbidity 2015– 17. Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford;
pp. 20– 44.
25 Tuffnell D, Knight M, Mackillop L; MBRRACE- UK VTE Chapter- Writing group. Lessons for pre-
vention and treatment of thrombosis and thromboembolism. In: Knight M, Bunch K, Tuffnell D,
et al. (eds) on behalf of MBRRACE- UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care—L essons learned
to inform maternity care from the UK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and
Morbidity 2014– 16. Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford;
pp. 34– 41.
26 Royal College of Obstetricians and gynaecologists (2015). Reducing the risk of venous thrombo-
embolism during pregnancy and the puerperium. green-t op guideline No 37a. M https:// www.
rcog.org.uk/ globalassets/ documents/ guidelines/ gtg- 37a.pdf
27 Sun LS, Li g, Miller TLK, et al. (2016). Association between a single general anesthesia exposure
before age 36 months and neurocognitive outcomes in later childhood. JAMA, 315, 2312– 20.
28 Beckett VA, Knight M, Sharpe P (2017). The CAPS Study: incidence, management and outcomes
of cardiac arrest in pregnancy in the UK: a prospective, descriptive study. BJOG, 124, 1374– 81.

