# 小兒新生兒麻醉

## Chapter 36: Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 920-987*

---


## 頁面 920

Chapter 36 899
Paediatric and neonatal
anaesthesia
Simon Berg and Stewart Campbell
Neonatal/ infant physiology 900 Patent ductus arteriosus 937
Fluid management 905 Pyloric stenosis 938
Anaesthetic equipment 908 Intussusception 939
Conduct of anaesthesia 913 Herniotomy 940
Postoperative pain relief 926 Circumcision/ hypospadias
Caudal block 929 repair 941
Epidural/ subarachnoid Orchidopexy 942
block 931 Cleft lip and palate 943
Peripheral nerve blocks 932 Congenital talipes
Down’s syndrome/ trisomy equinovarus 945
21 933 Femoral osteotomy 946
Diaphragmatic hernia 934 Inhaled foreign body 947
Gastroschisis/ exomphalos 935 Sedation 948
Tracheoesophageal fistula 936 Medical problems 949
Paediatric emergencies
Paediatric advanced life Neonatal resuscitation 956
support 951 The collapsed, septic child 959
Asystole and pulseless electrical Stabilisation of the sick child
activity 954 (prior to PICU transfer) 961
Ventricular fibrillation or Paediatric doses and
pulseless ventricular equipment 963
tachycardia 955
See also
% Tonsillectomy/ adenoidectomy: child pp. 767–8
% Severe bronchospasm pp. 1078–9
% Anaphylaxis pp. 1081–5
% Management of trauma pp. 1019–24


## 頁面 921

900
900 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Neonatal/ infant physiology
Paediatric anaesthesia embraces patients from the premature neonate to
the adolescent. Major differences exist between the anatomy, physiology
and pharmacological response of children and adults (Tables 36.1, 36.2 and
36.3). In anaesthetic terms, special considerations apply to the neonate.
Definitions
• Neonate: first 44w of post- conceptual age
• Infant: 1mo to 1y
• Child: 1– 16y
• Young person: 16– 18y
• Premature infant: <37w gestational age
• SGA: small for gestational age
• Low birthweight (LBW): <2500g
• Very low birthweight (VLBW): <1500g
• Extremely low birthweight (ELBW): <1000g.
Respiratory considerations
• At birth, each terminal bronchiole opens into a single alveolus instead of
fully developed alveolar clustering. The 20– 50 million alveoli are thick-
walled and alveolar growth continues by multiplication to reach 300
million by adolescence.
• Cartilaginous ribs are horizontally aligned, so that the ‘bucket handle’
action of the adult thorax is not possible. Intercostal muscles are poorly
developed, with a lower proportion of type 1 muscle fibres and fatigue
more easily. The diaphragm has a more horizontal attachment, reducing
mechanical advantage.
• Ventilation is essentially diaphragmatic and rate-d ependent. Abdominal
distension may cause splinting of the diaphragm, leading to respiratory
failure.
• Chest wall compliance is high because of the cartilaginous thorax;
intercostal or sternal recession is common with i work of breathing or
airway obstruction.
• Closing volume occurs within tidal breathing in the neonate. Minor
decreases in FrC increase the pulmonary shunt and lead to lung
collapse. The application of CPAP improves oxygenation and reduces
the work of breathing.
• Narrow airways result in i resistance, up to the age of 8y. Nasal
resistance represents almost 50% of total airway resistance, accentuating
the problem of children with nasal congestion who are obligate nasal
breathers. An NGT can increase resistance by 50% in neonates.
• Apnoea is a common postoperative problem in preterm neonates.
It is significant if the episode exceeds 20s or induces cyanosis or
bradycardia. CPAP may be helpful, with the distending pressure
triggering stretch receptors in the chest wall.
• Due to the higher metabolic rate and alveolar minute volume, volatile
agents achieve a more rapid induction and emergence than with
adults. They are profound respiratory depressants; most anaesthetised
neonates require intubation and controlled ventilation.
• respiratory parameters of the neonate are summarised in Table 36.1.


## 頁面 922

NEONATAL/INFANT PHYSIOLOGY 901
Table 36.1 respiratory parameters in the neonate and adult
Parameter Neonate Adult
V (spontaneous) (mL/ kg) 7 7– 10
T
V (IPPV) (mL/k g) 7– 10 10
T
Dead space (mL/ kg) 2.2 2.2
V :V ratio 0.3 0.3
D T
rr (breaths/ min) 30– 40 15
Compliance (mL/ cmHO) 5 100
2
resistance (cmHO/ L/ s) 25 5
2
Time constant (s) 0.5 1.1
O consumption (mL/ kg/ min) 7 3
2
Parameters for children over 2y approximate to adult values.
Estimate rr from the formula = 24 – age/ 2.
Cardiovascular considerations
• PVr falls at birth, in response to a rise in PaO/ pH and a fall in PaCO.
2 2
Subsequent closure of the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus may
reverse with hypoxia and acidosis, leading to pulmonary hypertension
and right- to- left shunt (transitional circulation).
• The neonate has small ventricles with reduced contractile mass and
poor ventricular compliance. CO is higher than in adults (200mL/k g/
min) and rate- dependent. Normal systolic pressure is 70– 90mmHg with
low SVr.
• Hr of up to 200 bpm can be tolerated. Bradycardia occurs in response
to hypoxia and should be treated with O, rather than atropine.
2
Neonatal and infant Hr <60 bpm require external cardiac compression.
• Autonomic and baroreceptor control is fully functional at term, but
vagally mediated parasympathetic tone predominates.
• Incidence of CHD is 7– 8 per 1000 live births; 10– 15% have associated
non- cardiac pathology. All neonates with midline defects should be
assessed for related cardiac lesions.
• CVS parameters in children are summarised in Table 36.2.
Gastrointestinal considerations
• The liver is immature. Enzyme systems have matured by 12w, but some
drugs are metabolised more slowly and others by different enzyme
pathways from adults. The action of barbiturates and opioids in the
neonate is prolonged and enhanced.
• Bilirubin metabolism is affected by a poorly developed glucuronyl
transferase system. rises in unconjugated bilirubin may lead to neonatal
jaundice and kernicterus by crossing the blood– brain barrier. Some
drugs (e.g. diazepam, vitamin K) displace bilirubin from plasma proteins
and can exacerbate jaundice.
• Glycogen stores are reduced in neonates. The premature baby and
stressed neonate are vulnerable to hypoglycaemia.


## 頁面 923

902
902 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Table 36.2 Cardiovascular parameters in children
Age (y) HR (bpm) Mean systolic BP Mean diastolic BP
(mmHg) (mmHg)
Neonate 80– 200 50– 90 25– 60
1 80– 160 85– 105 50– 65
2 80– 130 95– 105 50– 65
4 80– 120 95– 110 55– 70
6 75– 115 95– 110 55– 70
8 70– 110 95– 110 55– 70
10 70– 110 100– 120 60– 75
12 60– 110 110– 130 65– 80
Mean systolic BP over 1y = 80 + (age in y × 2).
• Vitamin K- dependent factors are low at term. routine administration of
vitamin K 1mg IM may prevent haemorrhagic disease of the newborn
and is recommended before surgery in the 1st week of life.
• Gastro- oesophageal reflux is common in neonates.
Renal considerations
• Nephron formation is complete at term but contains only 20% of the
adult cellular component.
• GFr reaches adult values by 2y as renal blood flow increases with
decreasing vascular resistance.
• Tubular function is immature, reaching adult values by 6–9 mo.
• Initially, neonates are unable to excrete a large water or Na+ load.
• Glucose and Na+ reabsorption are less efficient in premature infants.
• Because of the high metabolic rate and insensible losses, infants are
more susceptible to dehydration.
• It may be necessary to reduce drug dosages or extend frequency
intervals.
Haematological considerations
Circulating blood volume is estimated as shown in Table 36.3.
• Post- delivery Hb concentrations range from 130 to 200g/ L
(average 180g/ L), depending on the degree of placental transfusion.
Subsequently, Hb concentration falls, as the increase in circulating
volume exceeds growth in bone marrow activity and erythropoietin
levels fall. The resulting ‘physiological anaemia of infancy’ varies from
100 to 120g/ L.
• The predominant Hb type at term is HbF (80– 90%). By 4mo, this has
fallen to 10–1 5% and been replaced by HbA. HbF has a higher O
2
affinity due to reduced 2,3- diphosphoglycerate levels.
• Preoperative Hb <100g/ L is abnormal and should be investigated.


## 頁面 924

NEONATAL/INFANT PHYSIOLOGY 903
Table 36.3 Estimating paediatric circulating blood volume
Neonate 90mL/ kg
Infant 85mL/ kg
Child 80mL/ kg
Central nervous system
• Neurones are completely formed at term, but the total number of
brain cells is reduced.
• Dendritic proliferation, myelination and synaptic connections develop in
the 3rd trimester and first 2y of life.
• The blood– brain barrier is more permeable in neonates— barbiturates,
opioids, antibiotics and bilirubin all cross more readily.
• Autoregulation of the cerebral circulation is present from birth.
• The brain contains a higher proportion of fat, which may allow volatile
agents to reach higher concentrations more rapidly.
• All neonates, however immature, feel pain. The premature neonate may
be hypersensitive due to a relative increase of transmitters mediating
nociception with the later development of descending inhibitory
pathways.
• Dose requirements of volatile agents vary with age. The neonatal MAC
is comparable to adult values and decreases with prematurity. MAC
peaks at 1y (750% greater than adult values), then declines to reach
adult levels by the onset of puberty (see % pp. 411–12).
Weight
• Weight estimation formulae (Table 36.4) provide a guide for calculations
before the arrival of a child to the ED. They should be quickly replaced
by using a Broselow tape or weighing the child.
• All paediatric patients should be weighed preoperatively.
Table 36.4 Estimating the ideal weight of paediatric patients
Birth 3– 3.5kg
0– 1y Weight = [age (mo)/ 2] + 4
1– 5y Weight = [age (y) × 2] + 8
6– 12y Weight = [age (y) × 3] + 7
Thermoregulation
• Poorly developed thermoregulatory mechanism. High surface area to
volume ratio with minimal SC fat and poor insulation. Vasoconstrictor
response is limited, and the neonate is unable to shiver.
• Non- shivering thermogenesis is achieved by metabolism in brown fat
found in the back, shoulders and legs, and around the thoracic vessels.
This considerably increases O consumption and may worsen pre-
2
existing hypoxia. Brown fat is deficient in premature infants.

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 36.3 Estimating paediatric circulating blood volume |
| --- |
| Neonate 90mL/ kg Infant 85mL/ kg Child 80mL/ kg |
|  |


<!-- Table 2 -->
| Table 36.4 Estimating the ideal weight of paediatric patients |
| --- |
| Birth 3– 3.5kg 0– 1y Weight = [age (mo)/ 2] + 4 1– 5y Weight = [age (y) × 2] + 8 6– 12y Weight = [age (y) × 3] + 7 |
|  |


## 頁面 925

904
904 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• Neonates lose heat during surgery by conduction, convection and
evaporation, but predominantly by radiation.
• GA depresses the thermoregulatory response. Heat is lost from the
core to the cooler peripheral tissues. Prolonged hypothermia can lead
to a profound acidosis, with impaired perfusion. Platelet function is
impaired, but clotting factors are unaffected above 32°C. The duration
of opioids and muscle relaxants is prolonged.
Measures to conserve heat loss
• Theatres should be heated before surgery to warm the walls and raise
the ambient temperature; 21°C is adequate for larger children, but
infants and neonates may require 26°C. In practice, this is too hot;
theatre temperature of 21°C is an adequate compromise if active
measures are taken to reduce heat loss and maintain the ‘microclimate’
around the patient. Close doors to avoid draughts.
• Avoid exposure of the child; this applies particularly in the anaesthetic
room. The head is relatively large in infants and should be covered with
a hat, Gamgee or polythene. The rest of the body can also be insulated
with warm Gamgee and transparent drapes.
• Use active warming devices: warming mattress, convective warm air
blanket, overhead radiant heaters.
• Humidify and warm anaesthetic gases. Heated water vapour humidifiers
are available, but disposable HMEs are usually satisfactory.
• IV fluids, blood, surgical prep and wash fluids should be warmed.
• Temperature measurement is essential in neonatal surgery, paediatric
surgery of intermediate to long duration and where major fluid and
blood loss is expected.


## 頁面 926

FLUID MANAGEMENT 905
Fluid management
Eighty per cent of neonatal total body weight is water; the value is higher
in the preterm infant and reaches an adult level of 60% by 2y. Extracellular
water constitutes 45% of TBW at term (over 50% in the preterm) but at-
tains an adult value of 35% by early childhood. Plasma volume tends to stay
constant at 5% of total body weight, independent of age.
• Turnover of water is over double that of the adult; 40% of extracellular
water is lost daily in infants as urine, faeces, sweat and insensible
losses. A small increase in loss or reduction in intake can rapidly lead to
dehydration.
• Daily fluid maintenance is calculated from the calorie requirement:
100kcal/k g for the infant, with older children requiring 75kcal/k g, and
adults 35kcal/ kg. Each kcal requires 1mL of water for metabolism.
Neonatal fluid requirements
• Fluid is initially given cautiously, as the kidneys cannot easily excrete a
water or Na+ load. Newer ‘cold- light’ phototherapy does not require i
fluid intake.
• The fluid of choice is 10% glucose. This is adjusted in increments of
2.5% to achieve normoglycaemia. A blood sugar below 2.6mmol/L is
treated with 2mL/ kg of 10% glucose.
• routinely added electrolytes are Na+ 3mmol/k g/d and K+ 2mmol/ kg/ d.
Other electrolytes, including Ca2+, are added as indicated.
• The first 5d of neonatal fluid requirements are given in Table 36.5.1
Preterm requirements are dependent on birthweight and may be
proportionally higher.
Table 36.5 First 5d neonatal fluid requirement (mL/ kg/ d)
Days of life Term
Day 1 50– 60
Day 2 70– 80
Day 3 80– 100
Day 4 100– 120
Day 5 120– 150
Paediatric fluid requirements
• Maintenance is calculated using the ‘4– 2– 1’ regime.
• The fluid of choice is 0.45% sodium chloride/5 % glucose:
• 4mL/ kg/h (100mL/ kg/d ) for each of the first 10kg
• 2mL/ kg/h (50mL/ kg/d ) for each of the second 10kg
• 1mL/ kg/ h (25mL/ kg/d ) for each subsequent kg.
Maintenance requirement makes no allowance for extra losses from
gastroenteritis, intestinal obstruction and insensible loss from pyrexia.
Additional Na+ and K+ may also be required.

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 36.5 First 5d neonatal fluid requirement (mL/ kg/ d) |
| --- |
| Days of life Term |
| Day 1 50– 60 Day 2 70– 80 Day 3 80– 100 Day 4 100– 120 Day 5 120– 150 |
|  |


## 頁面 927

906
906 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Perioperative fluid management
Perioperative fluids comprise the basic maintenance requirement plus re-
placement of other observed fluid losses. These are replaced by isotonic
crystalloid, i.e. 0.9% sodium chloride, Hartmann’s solution, albumin or
blood, according to the clinical need. Glucose 1% or 2.5%/ Hartmann’s
solution (add 10mL or 25mL of 50% glucose to 500mL of Hartmann’s
solution) is a useful perioperative fluid for infants. regular blood glucose
measurement is essential in neonatal surgery.1
• Transfusion is required after 15% of blood loss or use a transfusion
trigger of 70g/ L.
• Estimated blood volume (EBV) (Table 34.3) and maximal allowable
blood loss (MABL) (Box 36.1) should be calculated prior to surgery.
• Swabs should be carefully weighed, and suction volumes recorded. Cell
salvage can be utilised for children >10kg.
• Postoperatively, use 0.45% sodium chloride/ 5% glucose (or Hartmann’s
solution for children >8– 10y) at two- thirds of maintenance.
Box 36.1 Maximal allowable blood loss calculation
MABL = (Hb initial − Hb low)/Hb low x EBV
Postoperative hyponatraemia
• Postoperative hyponatraemia (serum Na+ <135mmol/ L) is uncommon,
but more likely with the administration of hypotonic solutions, e.g.
0.18% sodium chloride/ 4% glucose.
• Symptoms are often non- specific, including nausea, vomiting and
headache (a common early sign). It may also present as seizure or
respiratory arrest.
• Hyponatraemic seizures respond poorly to anticonvulsants, and initial
management should be to administer an infusion of 3% sodium chloride.
Plan to increase serum Na+ to >125mmol/ L or until symptoms improve
(1mL/ kg of 3% sodium chloride should raise serum Na+ by 1mmol/ L).
• Asymptomatic hyponatraemia can be managed with 0.9% sodium
chloride. If hypervolaemic, restrict fluids to 50% of maintenance.
Fluid resuscitation
Shock is the clinical state in which delivery of O and metabolic substrates
2
is inadequate for cellular demand.
• In compensated shock, oxygenation of the vital structures (brain and
heart) is maintained by sympathetic reflexes at the expense of non-
essential tissues. BP remains normal, with an increase in SVr.
• In decompensated shock, hypotension develops and vital organ
perfusion is compromised.
• With irreversible shock, there is cyanosis, bradycardia and gasping
respiration. This is a preterminal event.
• Hypovolaemia is the commonest cause of circulatory failure in children.
Other causes of shock include pump failure (cardiogenic), distributive
(sepsis, anaphylaxis, neurogenic) and obstructive (cardiac tamponade,
tension pneumothorax).


## 頁面 928

FLUID MANAGEMENT 907
Assessment of dehydration and hypovolaemia
Assessment of dehydration and hypovolaemia is made predominantly on
clinical signs (Table 36.6).
• i capillary refill time ≥2s, cold and blue peripheries and an increasing
core– peripheral temperature gap with a thready pulse are early signs of
hypovolaemia.
• rising Hr may reflect pain, anxiety or fever.
• Oliguria and a reduced level of consciousness are late signs.
• Hypotension does not occur until >35% of blood volume is lost (Table 36.7).
Management
• Administer fluid boluses of 20mL/ kg crystalloid, either 0.9% sodium
chloride or Hartmann’s solution, and then reassess.
• Give blood when 15% of the circulating volume is lost (Table 36.3) or
if no improvement after 40mL/k g. Aim for Hb of 70g/ L or packed cell
volume (PCV) of 25%.2
• 4mL/k g of blood raises the Hb concentration by 10g/L . Transfused blood
should be fresh, if possible, warm, filtered and CMV-n egative for neonates.
It can be rapidly transfused using a syringe and a three-w ay tap.
• The ‘swing’ of the arterial or SpO trace is a valuable aid in assessing
2
intravascular loss. CVP may be less sensitive in smaller children because
of the greater venous capacitance.
Table 36.6 Clinical assessment of dehydration in paediatrics
Sign 5% dehydration 10% dehydration
Skin Loss of turgor Mottled, poor capillary return
Fontanelle Depressed Deeply depressed
Eyes Sunken Deeply sunken
Peripheral pulses Normal Tachycardia, weak pulse
Mental state Lethargic Unresponsive
replacement volume (mL) = weight (kg) × % loss, e.g. a 10% loss in a 5kg infant requires a
replacement volume of 50mL.
Table 36.7 Clinical assessment of hypovolaemia in paediatrics
Sign Compensated Uncompensated Irreversible
Hr i ii id
Systolic BP Normal/i Normal/d id
Pulse volume Normal/d d dd
Capillary refill Normal/i i ii
Skin colour Pale Mottled White/ grey
Skin temperature Cool Cold Cold
Mental status Agitated Lethargic Unresponsive
rr Normal/i ii Sighing
Fluid loss <25% 25– 40% >40%

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 36.6 Clinical assessment of dehydration in paediatrics |
| --- |
| Sign 5% dehydration 10% dehydration |
| Skin Loss of turgor Mottled, poor capillary return Fontanelle Depressed Deeply depressed Eyes Sunken Deeply sunken Peripheral pulses Normal Tachycardia, weak pulse Mental state Lethargic Unresponsive |
| replacement volume (mL) = weight (kg) × % loss, e.g. a 10% loss in a 5kg infant requires a replacement volume of 50mL. |


<!-- Table 2 -->
| Table 36.7 Clinical assessment of hypovolaemia in paediatrics |
| --- |
| Sign Compensated Uncompensated Irreversible |
| Hr i ii id Systolic BP Normal/i Normal/d id Pulse volume Normal/d d dd Capillary refill Normal/i i ii Skin colour Pale Mottled White/ grey Skin temperature Cool Cold Cold Mental status Agitated Lethargic Unresponsive rr Normal/i ii Sighing Fluid loss <25% 25– 40% >40% |
|  |


## 頁面 929

908
908 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Anaesthetic equipment
See also % Breathing systems, pp. 350–2; % Airway equipment, pp. 355–8.
Oropharyngeal airway
• range in size from 000 to 4 (4–1 0cm in length).
• rarely useful in neonates who are obligate nasal breathers but may be
advantageous in older children or in mask ventilation to prevent gastric
distension.
• Estimating the size of the airway is crucial. Incorrect size will worsen
the airway obstruction. Correct length is equal to the distance from the
incisors to the angle of the jaw.
• The airway should not be inverted during insertion in infants, as this may
damage the palate.
Nasopharyngeal airway
• Limited application in paediatric practice. Tolerated at lighter levels of
anaesthesia than an OPA and may be of use during induction/r ecovery
of some congenital airway problems or OSA.
• Well lubricated prior to insertion; bleeding is possible from mucosal or
adenoidal trauma, especially in younger children.
• Appropriate length is equal to the distance from the tip of the nostril to
the tragus of the ear.
• If an ETT is used as a modified nasopharyngeal airway, the size is
calculated by: (age/ 4 + 3.5).
Face masks
• Clear plastic masks with an inflatable rim provide an excellent seal for
SV and assisted ventilation.
• Manufactured in a round or teardrop shape; the round shape is suitable
for neonates and infants. Also available as ‘flavoured’ masks.
• Transparent design allows for observation of cyanosis/r egurgitation and
the presence of breathing.
• Size is estimated to fit an area from the bridge of the nose to the cleft
of the chin.
Supraglottic airway devices
• Tables 36.8 and 36.9 describes how to choose the appropriate size of
SGA.
• Indications and insertion techniques are similar to adult use. An
alternative method of insertion is to advance it partially inflated and
upside down behind the tongue before rotating through 180°.
• Smaller sizes have i complication rates. The effectiveness of these
smaller masks is not established for resuscitation.
• Intubating LMA (iLMA) available in size 3 which is potentially useful for
older children.
• Both the LMA ProSeal™ and i- gel® are available in a full range of
paediatric sizes.3
• LMA is best secured in slight flexion, and i-g el® in slight extension.


## 頁面 930

ANAESTHETIC EqUIPMENT 909
Table 36.8 Estimating LMA sizes in children
Size of LMA Weight (kg) Cuff volume (mL)
1 0– 5 2– 5
1.5 5– 10 5– 7
2 10– 20 7– 10
2.5 20– 30 12– 14
3 >30 15– 20
Table 36.9 Estimating i- gel® sizes in children
Size of i- gel® Patient size Patient weight guidance
(kg)
1 Neonate 2– 5
1.5 Infant 5– 12
2 Small paediatric 10– 25
2.5 Large paediatric 25– 35
3 Small adult 30– 60
Laryngoscopes
• Laryngoscope blades available in different lengths from size 0 to 3.
• Straight- blade preferable for infants ≤6mo due to high anterior larynx
(see % p. 909 for paediatric intubation).
• Polio and McCoy blades are also available.
• Many video laryngoscopes are available in paediatric sizes.
Endotracheal tubes
• Traditionally uncuffed paediatric ETTs have been used and are available
from 2.0mm to 7.0mm ID. Table 36.10 describes how to choose an
appropriate size of uncuffed tube.
• Uncuffed ETT ID (mm) may also approximate to the length of the
child’s middle finger (cm).4
• Standard cuffed tubes are available from 3.0mm ID. Microcuff® tubes
have a more distal, high- volume, low- pressure cuff. Use of a cuffed
ETT reduces intubation attempts to correctly size a tube and improves
ventilation characteristics without increasing the incidence of post-
extubation stridor.5
• Specific indications include children at high risk of aspiration, poor
lung compliance and facial burns. Cuff pressure should be limited to
20cmHO and continuously monitored. Tube sizes are a half size lower
2
than uncuffed tube.
• Paediatric versions of the rAE, armoured, and laser tubes all exist. A
north- facing uncuffed preformed tube has been developed for routine
paediatric surgery.

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 36.9 Estimating i- gel® sizes in children |
| --- |
| Size of i- gel® Patient size Patient weight guidance (kg) |
| 1 Neonate 2– 5 1.5 Infant 5– 12 2 Small paediatric 10– 25 2.5 Large paediatric 25– 35 3 Small adult 30– 60 |
|  |


## 頁面 931

901
910 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Table 36.10 Paediatric endotracheal tube sizes
Weight or age ETT ID (mm)
>2kg 2.5
2– 4kg 3.0
Term neonate 3.5
3mo to 1y 4.0– 4.5
Over 2yr Tube size = age/ 4 + 4
Cuffed tube size = age/ 4 + 3.5 (also check packaging as
manufacturer variation exists)
• The paediatric trachea is conical. The narrowest part is at the level of
the cricoid ring, the only part of the airway completely surrounded by
cartilage. If the ETT is too large, it will compress the tracheal epithelium
at this level, leading to ischaemia with consequent scarring and the risk
of subglottic stenosis.
• A correctly sized tube is one in which ventilation is adequate, but a
small audible leak of air is present when positive pressure is applied at
20cmHO.
2
• Paediatric 8.5mm connectors can be used as an alternative to the
standard 15mm connector. Catheter mounts should be avoided
because of the large dead space involved.
• Tube length in cm can be calculated as:
• Oral tube: age/ 2 + 12 (or tube size × 3)
• Nasal tube: age/ 2 + 15.
• Tube placement needs to be meticulous to avoid endobronchial
intubation or inadvertent extubation.
• To assess the length of tube to be passed below the vocal cords, use
the black guide line at the distal end of the tube or the tube size in cm.
Ultimately, the position must be confirmed clinically by auscultation.
Anaesthetic breathing systems
Ayre’s T- piece with Jackson– Rees modification
• The Jackson– rees modification of the Ayre’s T- piece (Mapleson F) is
a commonly used breathing system in paediatric anaesthetic practice.
Suitable for all children up to 20kg, beyond which it becomes inefficient.
Low- resistance, valveless, lightweight circuit. The expiratory limb
exceeds the V to prevent entrainment of room air during SV. The
T
open- ended 500mL reservoir bag or Jackson– rees modification allows:
• Assessment of the V
T
• The ability to partially occlude the bag for CPAP or PEEP
• The potential for assisted or controlled ventilation
• qualitative appreciation of lung compliance
• reduction in dead space during SV (FGF washes out expired gas
during the expiratory pause).
• Scavenging is limited. However, some versions of the T-p iece
incorporate a closed bag with an expiratory valve and a scavenging
attachment. requirements for FGF are higher in SV than in controlled
ventilation. recommendations are 2– 3 times the alveolar minute


## 頁面 932

ANAESTHETIC EqUIPMENT 911
volume for spontaneous breathing, or 1000mL plus 200mL/ kg in
controlled ventilation. FGF is dependent on the respiratory pattern. A
rapid rr requires a higher FGF. Conversely, an end- expiratory pause
during controlled ventilation will help reduce the FGF.
• Most children require a minimum FGF of 3L, which can then be
adjusted to achieve normocapnia and an inspired CO concentration
2
of <0.6kPa (4.5mmHg). Partial rebreathing allows conservation of heat
and humidification.
• ETCO concentration may be underestimated in children below 10kg
2
from dilution of expired gases. Sampling should be distal in the circuit.
Circle absorption systems
• Paediatric circle systems using 15mm lightweight hose are suitable for
children over 5kg. The unidirectional valves may increase resistance to
breathing and should not be allowed to become damp.
• During controlled ventilation, the leak around the ETT may require gas
flows to be i.
Bain system
The coaxial Mapleson D system is unsuitable for children under 20kg due to
resistance of the expiratory valve.
Mechanical ventilation
• Standard adult ventilators are suitable down to 20kg.
• Below 20kg, a paediatric ventilator should be capable of delivering small
V, rapid rr, variable inspiratory flow rates and different I:E ratios.
T
• Calculation of a small V may be compromised because of compression
T
of gases in the ventilator tubing and a variable leak around the ETT.
More sophisticated ventilators may be capable of measuring expired V,
T
which is of more practical value.
• Some ventilators are designed to work with specific breathing systems.
The Newton valve converts the Penlon Nuffield 200 ventilator from a
time- cycled flow generator to a time-c ycled pressure generator and can
be attached directly to the expiratory limb of the Ayre’s T-p iece. It is
suitable for neonates and children up to 20kg.
• New anaesthetic workstations incorporate integral ventilators attached
to circle systems suitable for paediatric practice.
• Pressure- controlled ventilation is commonly used and reduces the
risk of barotrauma/ pneumothorax. This mode will compensate for a
leak around the ETT, but not for changes in lung compliance, partial or
complete tube obstruction or bronchospasm.
• Volume control can make an allowance for changes in lung compliance,
but at a potential cost of high peak airway pressures. It does not
compensate for leaks around the ETT.
• The use of volume guarantee/p ressure control provides a balance.
• Ultimately, setting ventilator parameters is based on clinical observation.
Inspiratory flow, pressure or volume is gradually i until adequate
chest movement is observed. Measurement of capnography and SpO
2
confirms normocapnia and adequate oxygenation. The peak airway
pressure is kept to a minimum.


## 頁面 933

921
912 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• Most children can be ventilated adequately with inspiratory pressures
of 16– 20cmHO and an rr between 16 and 24 breaths/ min. Normally,
2
inspiratory pressure should not exceed 30cmHO. The rate can be
2
adjusted accordingly to achieve normocapnia. A minimum PEEP of
4cmHO is advisable for infants and neonates to maintain FrC.
2
• The immediate ability to hand- ventilate using the Ayre’s T- piece is
essential. It should always be available in the event of unexpected
desaturation or ventilator failure (plus a bag– valve– mask). Mechanical
ventilation may be unsuitable for the small premature neonate.
• With gastroschisis and exomphalos, hand ventilation facilitates
assessment of changes in lung compliance to help determine how much
of the abdominal contents should be reduced back into the abdominal
cavity. Hand ventilation during repair of a tracheoesophageal fistula can
allow the surgeon maximum exposure and time to perform the repair.


## 頁面 934

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 913
Conduct of anaesthesia
See % Chapter 16 for general information on conduct of anaesthesia.
Preoperative assessment
(See % Chapter 2 for general information on preoperative considerations.)
The preoperative visit is essential in establishing a rapport with both
parents and children and in helping to dissipate anxiety. Communication
should be simple, informative and truthful.
• Involve the parents, but try to question the child directly when
appropriate and stay at eye level if possible.
• A preadmission visit reduces parental anxiety and is beneficial to
children over 6y. Play therapists can help provide an informal setting and
prepare the child by describing the course of events from the ward to
induction of anaesthesia. A collection of photographs, video or virtual-
reality tools may be helpful.6
Preoperative investigations
routine preoperative Hb is indicated for:
• Neonates and ex-p remature infants under 1y
• Children at risk of SCD (see % pp. 257–9)
• Children for whom intraoperative transfusion may be necessary
• Children with systemic disease.
A preoperative Hb of <100g/ L is abnormal and needs to be investigated.
It does not necessarily entail cancellation if the child is haemodynamically
stable and otherwise well.
routine biochemistry is required for:
• Children with metabolic, endocrine or renal disease
• Children receiving IV fluids.
The child with an upper respiratory tract infection
The preschool child develops 6–8 UrTIs per year. Almost 25% of children
have a chronic runny nose due to seasonal rhinitis or adenoidal infection.
• Anaesthesia in the presence of an intercurrent UrTI is associated with a
higher risk of complications in younger children, particularly <1y. There
is an i incidence of coughing, breath- holding, desaturation, excess
secretions, airway obstruction, laryngospasm and bronchospasm. This
risk is i if the child is intubated.
• Children with moderate to severe chest infections should be
postponed. This will include those with productive cough, purulent nasal
discharge, pyrexia, abnormal chest auscultation and signs of viraemia or
constitutional illness, including diarrhoea and vomiting.
• The child with a mild UrTI is a difficult problem. The history in these
cases is crucial. It is important to decide whether the child is at the
beginning or at the end of the UrTI. Other members of the family or
children at school may have already experienced the same infection, and
this can provide useful information.
• A child deemed to be post-v iral, apyrexial, with no chest signs and constitu-
tionally well is probably fit for surgery, even if they have a runny nose.
• The decision to proceed is not always clear and requires careful
discussion with the parents. Level of urgency, complexity of surgery,
informed consent, good clinical judgement and experience are key
factors in these decisions.


## 頁面 935

941
914 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• Preoperative bronchodilators may reduce adverse airway events.
Propofol induction is associated with fewer complications than
sevoflurane. Awake extubation is the safer option.
• Significant UrTI requires postponement for a minimum of 2w and
at least 4w if lower respiratory tract involvement is suspected.
Bronchiolitis warrants a delay of at least 6w.
The child with a murmur
The majority of pathological murmurs are diagnosed perinatally. These chil-
dren will already be under the care of paediatric cardiology.
• Previously unreported murmurs are commonly heard at 2–4 y. The
majority are functional.
• A systolic murmur with normal heart sounds and palpable peripheral
pulses in a child with normal O saturations and no limitation in exercise
2
tolerance can be assumed to be innocent. If any doubt, defer surgery
until a formal assessment has been made.
• NICE guidelines no longer recommend routine antibiotic prophylaxis for
surgery in patients at risk of infectious endocarditis. However, if a child
requires prophylactic antibiotics for a GI or genitourinary procedure,
these should also include drugs effective against organisms that cause
infectious endocarditis.
The anxious or uncooperative child
Two- thirds of children have significant anxiety at induction. This may be due
to fear of pain, e.g. cannulation, or general anxiety about anaesthesia and
the operation.
• Children with behavioural issues, such as autism or ADHD, may
cause particular problems.7,8 If the problem can be anticipated, a
multidisciplinary approach should be adopted and a plan instituted
for the anaesthetic room. (See % pp. 95–6 for patients with learning
disabilities and/ or autism.)
• Some general tips:
• Agree a plan with the parents beforehand and involve the parents as
much as possible.
• Medical equipment can be frightening. Keep the amount on display to
a minimum and draw up drugs in advance.
• Minimise the number of people in the anaesthetic room and maintain
a calm, quiet atmosphere.
• Only one person at a time should speak to the child, at eye level if
possible.
• Adapt the technique to the child’s personality and
developmental level.
• Support coping strategies or distraction techniques, e.g. book,
bubbles or digital aids.
• Premedication can be useful, and older children may choose this option.
PO or buccal midazolam is commonly used, with dexmedetomidine
or ketamine as an alternative, either alone or in combination with
midazolam. Clonidine may be a useful option for autistic children.
• A decision on whether to proceed should centre on the best interests
of the child.
• There should be a clinical holding policy as a guideline to facilitate clinical
procedures.


## 頁面 936

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 915
Child protection
• Child protection training is mandatory for all hospital staff who work
with children.9
• Anaesthetists may become suspicious of child abuse during
resuscitation, on PICU, in the anaesthetic room, during the course of a
surgical procedure or rarely by direct disclosure.10
• In these situations, it is essential to act in the best interests of the child.
• If there is concern about suspected abuse, the first point of contact
should be the named clinical lead for safeguarding children or the
consultant paediatrician on call.
Consent
(See also % p. 42.)
Allow time at the end of the preoperative assessment for parents and
children to ask questions. Adopt the principle of shared decision-m aking
and discuss the risks associated with GA. Discuss the options of IV or
inhalational induction and plans for postoperative pain relief.
• Obtain consent for suppository, neuraxial blockade or regional/
peripheral nerve block, if indicated.
• A young person is deemed competent to consent from 16y.
• Children under 16y may have the capacity to decide, depending on their
ability to understand what is involved (Gillick competence). A Gillick-
competent child can consent to treatment against parental wishes but
cannot refuse it.
Anaesthetic neurotoxicity
• There is evidence from infant animal models that neuronal apoptosis
and neurodegeneration may be caused by prolonged or multiple
anaesthetics.
• To date, results from studies in the human infant have failed to show
adverse effects on cognitive development from a single anaesthetic
episode of short duration <1h.
• Parents/ carers can be advised that surgery is carried out in infants only
when necessary and that currently there is no indication of a long-t erm
neurological effect from a single anaesthetic exposure.11
Preoperative fasting
(See % pp. 57–8.)
Fasting instructions (Table 36.11) are designed to minimise the risk of re-
gurgitation of gastric contents with consequent pulmonary aspiration.
• Fasting reduces the gastric volume but does not guarantee an empty
stomach. Prolonged fasting does not further reduce the risk of
aspiration and, in infants, can lead to dehydration and hypoglycaemia.
• Infants may be at greater risk of regurgitation due to reduced lower
oesophageal sphincter tone and a tendency for stomach distension
during mask ventilation. However, the incidence of pneumonitis
following aspiration in children is much lower than in adults.12
• One- hour fluid fasting for clear fluids does not significantly alter gastric
pH or residual volume, compared with 2h.13
• Clear fluids can be given safely up to 1h preoperatively,14 and the intake of
fluids (either water or a fruit squash drink) should be encouraged. Children
are less irritable at induction, and there may be a reduction in PONV.


## 頁面 937

961
916 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Table 36.11 Guidelines for preoperative fasting periods
Ingested material Minimum fast (h)
Infants <1y Children >1y
Clear liquids 1 1
Breast milk 4 4
Formula milk 6 6
Light meal and all milk 6 6
Source: data from Thomas M, et al. (2018). Consensus statement on clear fluids fasting for
elective pediatric general anesthesia. Pediatr Anesth, 28, 411– 14; however, there may be unit
variability.
• Contraindications to reduced fasting times include gastro-o esophageal
reflux disease, oesophageal stricture, achalasia, gastroparesis and severe
cerebral palsy.
• The data for milk and solid food are less clear. Breast milk is cleared
from the stomach more rapidly than formula milk in infants.
• Every unit should have fasting guidelines. Close liaison with ward staff
ensures that children receive adequate clear fluid preoperatively and
that milk feeds for neonates and infants are appropriately timed.
Topical anaesthetics
Topical LA preparations reduce the pain of venepuncture and facilitate IV
induction.
• EMLA® cream is a eutectic mixture of 2.5% lidocaine and 2.5%
prilocaine in a 1:1 ratio. It should be applied for at least 45min and
can produce vasoconstriction. The duration of action is 30–6 0min.
EMLA® should be avoided in premature infants <37w and used with
caution in children <1y receiving medication that may predispose to
methaemoglobinaemia.
• Ametop® is a 4% gel formulation of tetracaine (amethocaine). The
onset time is 30min for venesection and 45min for cannulation. There is
a prolonged duration of action (4– 6h) after the gel has been removed.
It is licensed from 4w of age and has vasodilating properties. There may
be a higher incidence of allergic reactions. The gel should be applied
for no longer than 90min and removed earlier if a rash or itchiness
develops.
• LMX 4® is topical 4% lidocaine and should be applied at least 30min
before procedure. It should not be left on the skin >60min in a 1–2 mo
old, 4h if 3– 11mo and 5h if 1– 17y.
• It is important to identify the veins to be anaesthetised and not blindly
apply the LA preparation to the dorsum of each hand. Keep the area
bandaged to prevent removal or licking of the preparation!
• Ethyl chloride is a cryoanalgesic. It is useful when topical LA
preparations are either contraindicated or forgotten.


## 頁面 938

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 917
Premedication
(See % Premedicants, pp. 66–8; % Sedation, p. 419.)
routine sedative premedication is not necessary (‘parents are often the
best premedication’).
• Sedative premedication is used to reduce anxiety and facilitate
compliance at induction (Table 36.12).15
• It may also reduce PONV and postoperative delirium. Postoperative
amnesia with midazolam may reduce postoperative behavioural
changes, including nightmares, bedwetting and eating disorders,
especially in the preschool child.
• recovery time may be prolonged.
• Indications for premedication include excessive anxiety or non-
compliance, previous distress, learning disability and behavioural issues.
• Contraindications include an anticipated difficult airway, OSA, reduced
conscious level, raised ICP and i risk of aspiration.
• Infants have not yet developed a fear of strangers and appear relatively
undisturbed when separated from their mothers. The preschool child
is vulnerable to separation anxiety in a strange environment, but
without the ability to reason. Children from 3 to 6y may require a
simple explanation and children from 6 to 12y will need a more detailed
explanation and a sense of control. Older children or adolescents may
request premedication.
• PO midazolam is commonly used. It acts within 20–3 0min to reduce
anxiety, leading to a more cooperative child, but with minimal delay
in recovery. The IV formulation is often used but is extremely bitter
and should be diluted in fruit juice or paracetamol syrup. The newer
preparation of buccal midazolam (Buccolam®) is tasteless and requires
little cooperation from the child. It does not affect fasting and has a
quicker onset of 10– 15min. Midazolam can also be given intranasally
where it has a rapid onset of action within 5–1 5min but is poorly
tolerated because of the burning sensation in the nasal mucosa. Use a
mucosal atomiser device and divide the dose between each nostril.
• Ketamine causes excessive salivation and postoperative emergence
delirium (although these may be less frequent in children). It should be
given PO in combination with midazolam or IM as a last resort (use
the 50mg/ mL preparation). The latter option would require careful
discussion with the parents.
• Clonidine is tasteless. It may reduce the postoperative analgesic
requirement. It has a slow onset and recovery time and may cause
bradycardia and hypotension; there is no amnesic effect.
• Dexmedetomidine may be useful intranasally as a 3rd-l ine drug if other
options have failed.
• An antisialogogue may be required for children with excessive
secretions, e.g. Down’s syndrome and cerebral palsy, and for the
suspected difficult airway in younger children and co-a dministration
with ketamine. Absorption of oral atropine is variable. To be
certain of efficacy, administer atropine 10 micrograms/k g IM 30min
preoperatively or glycopyrronium bromide (5 micrograms/k g) IM or IV.


## 頁面 939

981
918 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Table 36.12 Sedative premedication
Drug Dose Route Onset Duration
1st line
Midazolam 0.5mg/ kg PO 20– 30min 1– 2h
Max: 20mg
0.2mg/ kg Buccal 10– 15min 1– 2h
Max: 10mg
0.3mg/ kg Nasal 10– 15min 1– 2h
Max: 10mg
2nd line
Midazolam + 0.5mg/ kg + PO 20min 1– 3h
ketamine 3mg/ kg
Clonidine 4micro grams/ PO 45– 60min 6h
kg
Midazolam + 0.5mg/ kg + 2 PO 30min 6h
clonidine micro grams/ kg
3rd line
Ketamine 5– 10mg/ kg PO 20– 30min 3– 4h
3mg/ kg IM 5– 10min 3– 4h
Dexmedetomidine 2–4micro- Nasal 45min 90min
grams/ kg
Max: 200
micrograms
Parents in the anaesthetic room
In the UK, a parent is routinely allowed into the anaesthetic room, while
their child is anaesthetised. Enforced separation disempowers the parent
and is an emotionally traumatic experience for both parent and child.
• Parents are naturally anxious over the loss of control, a strange
environment and the possibility of adverse events. Unfortunately, this
parental anxiety may communicate itself to the child.
• Parental presence should not be compulsory. It is not always beneficial
and may even be counterproductive with a very anxious parent.
Evidence of benefit has only been demonstrated for children older than
4y with a calm parent attending the induction.
• Preschool children are especially at risk of behavioural disturbance,
probably because of difficulties in reasoning. In contrast, some
adolescents may not wish their parents to accompany them.
• Anaesthetic induction appears to be the most distressing event
experienced by parents. Separation from the child after induction,
watching the child become unconscious and the degree of stress
experienced by the child before induction are all important factors.
• The parent should always be accompanied by a nurse or play therapist
who can support and escort them out of the theatre suite after
induction of anaesthesia. It is less common to allow both parents into
the anaesthetic room; be aware of the space constraints.


## 頁面 940

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 919
Induction of anaesthesia
(See also % pp. 406–9.)
• Induction should occur in a child- friendly environment. A dedicated
paediatric theatre is not always an option. In these circumstances, a
customised paediatric anaesthetic trolley incorporating a comprehensive
range of airway and vascular equipment is important.
• Prepare drugs and equipment before the child arrives. recheck the
weight (Table 36.4).
• Online calculators or smartphone apps can be useful to check doses.
• Precalculate the dose (and volume) of atropine and suxamethonium in
prepared syringes, as it may be given by your assistant in an emergency
(see Table 36.15). A 10mL syringe of propofol is useful as a 1st-l ine
treatment for laryngospasm.
• SpO is the minimum monitoring acceptable in the anaesthetic room,
2
although it will not read accurately on the agitated child. Many children
will tolerate an ECG and a BP cuff prior to induction.
Inhalational induction
(See also % pp. 391–2.)
• It is important to learn more than one method. Not all children are
susceptible to the same technique.
• Sevoflurane is rapidly acting, enabling a smooth induction. It is not
odourless but is relatively non-i rritant. For the suspected difficult airway,
use sevoflurane in 100% O; otherwise 50% NO/ O is satisfactory, and
2 2 2
anecdotally NO may obtund the child’s sense of smell, facilitating induction.
2
• Emergence delirium has a reported incidence of 20% with sevoflurane.
There is a strong association with ENT surgery, preschool ♂ , parental
and patient anxiety, rapid awakening and inadequate analgesia. A single
dose of propofol 1mg/ kg at the end of surgery may be of benefit.
• Involve the parent as much as possible. This may involve holding the
child or even helping with the induction.
• Position the child either supine on the trolley or across the lap of the
parent, so that the parent or anaesthetic assistant can gently restrain the
arms, if necessary. Warn the parent that the child’s head will become
floppy and need support.
• For smaller children, a cupped hand method is useful. Occlude the end
of the bag to direct all the FGF towards the patient’s mouth and nose.
• A face mask is often tolerated by older children. This can be held by the
parent, child or anaesthetist, and the child can be encouraged to blow
up the bag ‘like a balloon’. A flavoured face mask may be useful initially,
but the volatile agent rapidly becomes the dominant smell.
• The parent should be warned of abnormal movements when the child
is nearly anaesthetised.
• Once anaesthesia is achieved and the eyelash reflex is absent,
anaesthesia can be maintained with another volatile agent, if desired.
Intravenous induction
• The smaller child sits across the parent’s lap, and the arm is placed
under the parent’s axilla, thereby obstructing the child’s view. The older
child will usually lie on the trolley, with the parent on one side holding
the child’s hand, while the other is cannulated.
• The induction agent of choice is propofol 3– 5mg/ kg, with 1% lidocaine
(1mL/ 10mL propofol) added to reduce pain on injection.


## 頁面 941

920
920 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Propofol is licensed for children over 1mo.
• If using a small vein, the dilution of propofol with an equal volume of
0.9% sodium chloride significantly reduces pain on injection.
• The Paedfusor TCI system is approved for >1mo or >5kg.16 The dose
is age- dependent and proportionally greater than the adult dose due to
the higher volume of distribution and clearance in children.
• Thiopental 4– 6mg/ kg is a suitable alternative and is licensed for
neonates (2mg/ kg).
• Ketamine 2mg/ kg is useful for haemodynamically compromised
patients, usually in conjunction with fentanyl 1– 2 micrograms/ kg.
Emergence phenomena are less common in children, especially in
combination with midazolam, but the incidence of PONV and salivation
is higher.
Comparison of intravenous and inhalational induction
• IV induction is simple and safer but is associated with more hypoxia,
possibly because children are rarely preoxygenated.
• Inhalational induction produces more coughing and laryngospasm.
• In practice, it seems prudent to opt for IV induction, if possible, unless
the child actively chooses an inhalational method.
Tips for cannulation
Securing IV access can be difficult, even for paediatric anaesthetists! It is im-
portant to realise this; relax and send for help, if necessary. Good lighting,
patience, competent anaesthetic assistance and a selection of cannulae with
prepared 0.9% sodium chloride flush syringes are all essential.
• Neonates often have surprisingly good superficial veins on the hand
and wrist. Conversely, healthy children between 3mo and 2y can be
notoriously difficult because of the fat pads over the hands and feet.
Filling a knotted disposable surgical glove with warm water and placing
over the dorsum of the hand may be helpful.
• Compression of a limb by the assistant should be gentle to act
as a venous, rather than an arterial, tourniquet. The skin is often
mobile and should be gently stretched. In neonates, it may be easier
for the anaesthetist to flex and squeeze the wrist with their non-
cannulating hand.
• Examine the wrists and dorsum of the feet for superficial veins. Scalp
veins are possible in neonates. Long saphenous and cephalic veins may
be palpated.
• In some children, most commonly in the feet, the skin is surprisingly
tough and a small nick in the skin with a 21G needle may be necessary.
Loosening the cap of the cannula or priming with 0.9% sodium chloride
will enhance flashback of blood in small veins.
• Transfixion is possible in smaller children. It is potentially useful for
all veins, but especially in ‘blind’ long saphenous and femoral vein
cannulation. Slowly pull back the cannula until in the vein, and then
gently advance.
• If cannulating the femoral vein, a small support under the pelvis and
slight external rotation may be useful.
• A handheld near- infrared device (e.g. AccuVein®) can be very useful
for identifying veins on the dorsum of the hands and feet that can be
neither visualised nor palpated.


## 頁面 942

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 921
• Ultrasound is useful for difficult access. A small ‘footprint’ probe of
7– 10MHz is suitable for most ages. It is particularly useful for central
venous and peripheral arterial access, but veins in the upper arm and
the long saphenous vein can also be visualised.16
• If all else fails, intraosseous access can be an invaluable alternative.
Observing aseptic precautions, prepare an area of the skin over the
anteromedial aspect of the tibia, 1cm below and medial to the tibial
tuberosity. The IO needle is inserted perpendicularly to the skin and
advanced in a twisting, pushing movement against the bone, until there
is a sudden loss of resistance. The position is confirmed if the needle
remains upright without support and marrow can be aspirated, and fluid
can be administered without SC swelling around the entry site. Children
can be successfully anaesthetised via this route and the IO route is
particularly useful in fluid resuscitation of the shocked child before
definitive IV access can be gained. routine blood samples, including X-
match, can be taken from this site before induction. Battery-p owered
devices are available (EZ- IO®).
• Surgical cut- down is rarely needed and often technically difficult, and
should be reserved as a last resort.
Airway management
Airway complications, including coughing, laryngospasm and upper airway
obstruction, are more common in children.
• Use chin lift and jaw thrust to maintain a clear airway.
• Hyperextension of the neck in the neonate often occludes the airway,
and a neutral position is usually more successful. A small shoulder
roll (towel or gauze roll) may be beneficial to achieve this. For older
children, the adult ‘sniffing the morning air’ position should be adopted.
• Smaller children do not require a pillow; this may lead to unwanted
head flexion.
• The paediatric face mask should be accurately sized and held gently,
but firmly, on the face with the thumb and forefinger. The other fingers
should curl around and grip the mandible. It is important to avoid
pressing on the floor of the mouth, which will push the tongue forward
and obstruct the airway.
• Early use of an OPA may be useful in older children, especially if the
child has grossly enlarged tonsils. Caution in a lightly anaesthetised child,
as this risks laryngospasm.
• A nasopharyngeal airway may be helpful. This should be well lubricated.
It is indicated in cases of micrognathia and can be inserted at lighter
levels of anaesthesia.
• The most important technique in the management of the airway is
judicious use of CPAP. Ensure a good seal with the face mask, and then
partially occlude the bag of the Ayre’s T- piece.
Laryngospasm
(See also % pp. 370–1.)
Laryngospasm is more common in children. Additional risk factors include
inhalational induction, asthma, UrTI and chronic lung disease. Children be-
come cyanotic more rapidly than adults because of i metabolic rate/ O
2
consumption and reduced FrC.


## 頁面 943

922
922 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• Bradycardia is a premorbid event, indicating an inadequate CO and a
significant risk of cerebral hypoxia.
• Partial laryngospasm management:
• 100% O
2
• CPAP
• Gentle assisted ventilation
• Propofol incremental 0.5mg/k g boluses.
• Complete laryngospasm management:
• 100% O
2
• CPAP
• Assisted ventilation may exacerbate the condition by inflating the
stomach and forcing the arytenoids and false cords against the true
vocal cords
• Early administration of suxamethonium:
1– 2mg/ kg IV
4mg/ kg IM to thigh with massage
3mg/ kg submental (extraoral approach), intralingual with massage is
described, but not preferred due to less familiarity with this route.
• Atropine 10– 20 micrograms/ kg may be necessary. Precalculate
these doses and volumes.
Intubation
(For ETT size, see % p. 910.)
• Neonatal intubation is not normally difficult, only different. The
neonate has:
• Proportionately larger head, shorter neck, larger tongue and smaller
mandible
• Larynx that is more anterior/ superior (C3– C4, compared
with C5– C6)
• Epiglottis that is large, floppy, U- shaped and with obliquely angled
vocal cords.
• In the absence of recognised medical conditions with associated airway
complications, paediatric intubation is usually straightforward.
• Below 6mo of age, a straight-b laded laryngoscope can improve the view
of the glottis. The head should be in a neutral position, and the shoulders
supported if necessary. Advance the straight blade past the larynx,
then withdraw slowly until the larynx becomes visible, i.e. the blade is
posterior to the epiglottis. (The blade is used to lift the large, floppy, U-
shaped epiglottis out of the way.) Gentle cricoid pressure is often helpful.
If nasal intubation is required, use a laryngoscope blade with minimal
guttering to allow more room for instrumentation in the oropharynx.
Over 6mo of age, a curved blade is usually easier. Intubation can be
performed with the blade resting in the vallecula, as in adults.
• Most intubated neonates will also require an NGT (8– 10Fr).
• Always have a range of ETTs available, including a half size above and
below the original estimation.
• Complications are common. Oesophageal and endobronchial
intubation, extubation, kinking of the tube and disconnection should
all be anticipated. Secretions are far more likely to cause obstruction
because of the smaller tube sizes involved, and periodic suction may
be necessary. Confirm the length of the tube by auscultation before
securing.


## 頁面 944

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 923
• Intubation increases the work of breathing. The reduction in the
cross- sectional area of the neonatal trachea with a size 3.5 tube in situ
increases airway resistance by a factor of 16. Most intubated infants
should undergo controlled ventilation as part of the anaesthetic
technique.
Tube fixation
Tube fixation is crucial. The neonatal trachea is only 4cm in length.
Inadvertent extubation and endobronchial intubation are common.
• Secure with a ‘three- point fixation’ to prevent movement of the tube in
all three planes.
• Two pieces of trouser- shaped Elastoplast® may be used, with one ‘leg’
across the upper lip while the other ‘leg’ is wrapped around the tube.
An OPA helps splint the tube.
• There are numerous other methods of fixation, all equally valid. The
tube should be secured to the maxilla, rather than to the more mobile
mandible.
Difficult intubation
(See also % p. 367; % Unanticipated difficult airway in adults, pp. 368–72.)
The key to difficult intubation is to identify the at- risk patient and plan
accordingly with appropriate assistance and equipment.
• Some conditions are well known to be associated with airway problems
(e.g. Pierre– robin, Treacher Collins and Goldenhar syndromes). Other
patients can be identified by assessment of the airway preoperatively,
specifically the presence of micrognathia and retrognathia.18
• Optional premedication with atropine 20 micrograms/k g IM or
glycopyrronium 5 micrograms/k g IM 30min preoperatively to dry
secretions.
• The traditional method is deep inhalational anaesthesia with CPAP and
IV access. Laryngoscopy and intubation are attempted with the patient
breathing spontaneously.
• Halothane is now rarely available, and sevoflurane is the agent of
choice. A propofol infusion can be used to supplement this technique.
• HFNO can double apnoea time for desaturation <90% in well
children.19
• A blind nasal approach to intubation is possible, but experience in the
technique is declining and there is a risk of trauma.
• An SGA will often secure the airway adequately, without the need for
intubation.
• If intubation is still necessary, it may be possible to pass a bougie
through an SGA into the trachea and then railroad an ETT. A size 3
iLMA is available and may be suitable for a larger child. An FOB can also
be used via the LMA.
• Videolaryngoscopy allows a magnified, high- resolution view of the
airway, with visual confirmation of intubation. The blade is usually
inserted in the midline without a tongue sweep. Most are now available
in a range of neonatal and paediatric sizes.20
• FOB intubation is rarely necessary. Children need to be anaesthetised,
but a propofol infusion is an alternative method to volatile anaesthesia.
Smaller- size neonatal and paediatric bronchoscopes do not all have a
suction channel and should be checked to confirm that the selected ETT
will fit over them.


## 頁面 945

924
924 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• Conventional ETTs may be difficult to railroad, and armoured tubes
should be considered. Alternatively, a guide- wire can be inserted into
the trachea using the suction channel. An exchange catheter is passed
over the wire, and then the ETT railroaded over the exchange catheter.
• A tracheostomy is rarely required. It is exceedingly difficult as an
emergency procedure. Paediatric percutaneous cricothyroidotomy
cannulae are available in 18G and 16G sizes and should be available in
the anaesthetic room.
• Paediatric DAS guidelines for the difficult airway should be readily
available.21
Rapid sequence induction
(See also % pp. 388–90.)
• ranitidine and metoclopramide are not routinely prescribed.
• Preoxygenation does not usually present problems with infants and
older children but may be more difficult in preschool children.
• Inhalational induction may be necessary, after which cricoid force can be
applied while breathing spontaneously.
• Suxamethonium should be preceded by atropine to prevent
bradycardia. rocuronium 1.2mg/ kg is a suitable alternative.
• Cricoid force may reduce aspiration and stomach inflation but,
especially if excessive, can impede face mask ventilation, laryngoscopy
and passage of the ETT. It should be reduced if difficulties with
ventilation or laryngoscopy are encountered.
• There should be a low threshold for using an NGT in neonates and
small infants. If already in situ in the neonate, it should remain in place,
rather than being removed. There is no consensus for older children.
• The child should be extubated awake in the left lateral position.
Maintenance
• Position the infant and smaller child with both arms raised at the level
of the head. Exposure of the hand allows assessment of the pulse,
peripheral temperature, colour and capillary refill. A blocked IV may be
more easily cleared and a new cannula may be easier to site.
• The pulse oximeter probe should be sited on the same arm as the
IV infusion, and the contralateral arm to the BP cuff. Avoid oximeter
probes on the feet, as the trace is often lost once abdominal surgery
commences.
• Check that the ETT is still in situ and securely fixed, and that the lungs
are being ventilated adequately and equally.
• The connections should all be secure, and the breathing system
supported, if necessary.
• Confirm that cannulae are secure, working and accessible; extension
tubing may be necessary. Three- way taps allow the administration of
drugs and fluid volume when necessary. Neonatal surgery requires a
minimum of two cannulae (maintenance and volume).
• Blood sugar should be checked regularly.
• Even small air bubbles in IV fluids can be potentially harmful to infants,
especially in the presence of an ASD or VSD.


## 頁面 946

CONDUCT OF ANAESTHESIA 925
• Theatre temperature should be about 21°C and preheated. The child’s
head should be covered, and body exposure reduced to a minimum.
It is easier to prevent hypothermia than to treat it. Both IV fluids and
surgical wash should be warmed.
• Minimum monitoring should include ECG, BP (with appropriately
sized cuff), SpO, capnography, temperature, inspired and expired
2
anaesthetic agent (if used) and gas monitoring, airway pressure
and peripheral nerve stimulation (if an NMBA has been used). The
ventilator alarm should be set to appropriate values.
• The width of the BP cuff should be 20% greater than the diameter of
the arm to avoid artefactually raised BP.
• Electronic monitoring is often unreliable with the sick or shocked
neonate. It should support, but not replace, clinical observation.
• Do not let surgery start until you are ready and the preoperative checks
have been completed.
• Anaesthetic complications in paediatric practice are as common during
maintenance as at induction or in the postoperative period.
Reversal
Following surgery, the child should be warm, well oxygenated, normocarbic
and pain- free. A cold, acidotic neonate will not breathe postoperatively.
• SGAs can be removed, either deep or awake. If an armoured LMA is
in situ, a bite block will be needed. There is often a stage shortly before
waking when the mouth opens slightly to mimic a small yawn; this is an
ideal opportunity to deftly remove the LMA.
• Most children should be extubated awake. If warm and with adequate
analgesia, this is tolerated well. Exceptions include tonsillectomy and
other procedures when coughing is to be avoided. In these cases, deep
extubation may be preferable.
• Neonates should be extubated awake, preceded by an assisted
ventilation to preoxygenate the lungs.
Postoperative nausea and vomiting
(See also % pp. 442–6.)
PONV is unusual under the age of 3y and more common in post- pubertal
girls. Predictors include type of procedure (adenotonsillectomy, squint sur-
gery), duration of surgery, travel sickness and previous PONV.
• Opioids increase the risk of PONV. regional anaesthesia and other
opioid- sparing techniques should be encouraged.
• There is some evidence of reduced PONV with TIVA in children. NO
2
does not appear to be associated with an i risk of PONV in children.
• In children at high risk of PONV, consider combination therapy of IV
ondansetron 150 micrograms/k g up to 4mg IV and dexamethasone 150
micrograms/ kg up to 8mg.22
• Cyclizine is no longer recommended for reducing PONV in children.


## 頁面 947

926
926 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Postoperative pain relief
Children feel pain as much as adults. Underdosage is common due to in-
adequate knowledge and fear of side effects. Poor- quality pain relief can
lead to prolonged hospital stay, maladaptive behaviour (temper tantrums,
bed- wetting and nightmares) and chronic pain issues.
• Similar principles to adult practice apply (see % pp. 1152–3), including the
application of multimodal analgesia and specialised pain charts.23
• Pain assessment can be challenging with infants and neonates. Use
physiological/ behavioural pain scales, e.g. the Children’s revised
Impact of Event Scale (CrIES) is used for infants ≥38w of gestation.
Characteristics of crying, O requirement, i vital signs, facial expression
2
and sleep state are scored. A maximal score of 10 is possible. If the
CrIES score is >4, further pain assessment should be undertaken.
Analgesic administration is indicated for a score of ≥6.
• The FLACC Scale is used for children who are unable to communicate
their pain (ages 2– 7). Each of the five categories (face, legs, activity,
consolability and cry) is scored from 0 to 2. The total score will lie in the
range of 0– 10, where 0 represents no pain and 7– 10 represents severe
discomfort/ pain.
• Older children may be able to self- report using faces charts, e.g. Wong–
Baker or visual analogue scales.
• Use non- pharmacological methods such as explanation, reassurance and
distraction (stories, play, music).
• Paracetamol and NSAIDs (Table 36.13) are widely prescribed for minor
cases/ day surgery and for their opioid- sparing effects. Drugs should
be given regularly. Single doses of IV perioperative analgesics should
be documented on the ward drug chart to avoid duplicate doses being
given postoperatively.
• Codeine is no longer recommended for children under 12y.
• Opioids: morphine infusions can be administered cautiously to
neonates, and as nurse- controlled analgesia (NCA) for smaller children
with a background infusion. PCA can be used effectively in children as
young as 6y, some with a low background infusion. Bolus function must
not be activated by parents (Table 36.14).
• Caudal analgesia and PNBs are extremely useful for day cases.
• Epidural blockade is of proven benefit in abdominal and orthopaedic
surgery. Below 6mo, it is technically easier, and possibly safer, to insert
the catheter via the caudal route (see % pp. 929–30).
• Ultrasound-g uided blocks are common in children using the same
principles and landmarks as adults.
• Nerve infusion catheters and wound catheters are gaining popularity.
• Liaison with ward staff is crucial, and a standardised multidisciplinary
team approach, preferably with an acute pain service, is ideal.
• Drugs doses may need to be modified in obese or underweight patients.


## 頁面 948

POSTOPErATIVE PAIN rELIEF 927
Regional anaesthesia
Successful regional blockade provides conditions for light and haemo-
dynamically stable GA. The stress response is attenuated and early, pain-
free emergence is possible, leading to a smooth postoperative recovery.
• Few children tolerate these techniques awake, and the majority of
regional blocks are performed on anaesthetised patients.
• Motor blockade is unnecessary and low concentrations of LA can
be used. The most widely used solutions are 0.25% bupivacaine/
levobupivacaine and 0.2% ropivacaine.
Table 36.13 An example of analgesia prescribing guidance in children
Mild to moderate pain
Paracetamol
Neonates and infants 10mg/ kg IV 8- hourly
<10kg
15mg/ kg PO 6- hourly
10– 50kg 15mg/ kg PO/ IV 6- hourly
>50kg 1g PO/ IV 6- hourly
Ibuprofen*
1– 3mo 5mg/ kg PO 8- hourly
>3mo 10mg/ kg PO 6- hourly
Diclofenac*
>6mo 1mg/ kg PO/ Pr 8- hourly
Ketorolac*
0.5mg/ kg IV 6- hourly
Morphine
100micrograms/ kg PO 6- hourly
Moderate to severe pain
Morphine
Neonate to 3mo 100micrograms/ kg PO 3– 4 hourly
3mo to 1y 200micrograms/ kg PO 3– 4 hourly
>1y 300micrograms/ kg PO 3– 4 hourly
* NSAIDs: caution with renal impairment, asthma and low platelets. If possible, administer
with food.
** Note that there may be slight variation in guidance between different institutions.
Do not exceed adult doses.
Source: data from Mason DG et al. Guidance for prescribing pain relief in children. Paediatrics
at the Nuffield Department of Anaesthetists (P@NDA), Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Trust, 2019.


## 頁面 949

928
928 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Table 36.14 Typical IV morphine options for severe postoperative pain in
children
Morphine 50– 100 micrograms/ kg IV incremental boluses
Morphine Morphine 1mg/ kg in 50mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, i.e.
infusion 20 micrograms/ kg/ mL
rate: 1– 2mL/ h (20– 40 micrograms/ kg/ h)
Morphine NCA Morphine 1mg/ kg in 50mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, i.e.
20 micrograms/ kg/ mL
rate: 0.5– 1mL/ h. Bolus: 1mL. Lockout: 15– 20min
Morphine PCA Morphine 1mg/ kg in 50mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, i.e.
20 micrograms/ kg/ mL
rate: 0– 1mL/ h. Bolus: 1mL. Lockout: 5min


## 頁面 950

CAUDAL BLOCK 929
Caudal block
Caudal extradural analgesia has a wide application in children. It is suitable
for all surgery below the umbilicus, including general surgery, urology and
orthopaedics. The technique is easier than with adults, with a higher suc-
cess rate of 795%. Epidural fat is less dense and less tightly packed in chil-
dren, with the result that LA can spread more easily and quickly. Therefore,
caudals can achieve a higher dermatomal block.24
Technique
• Position the patient in the left lateral position, with the legs flexed at the
hip. Aseptic technique is a prerequisite.
• Identify the sacral hiatus as the apex of an equilateral triangle with
the base formed by a line joining the posterior superior iliac spines
(Fig. 36.1).
• Alternatively, with the hips flexed at 90°, a line extended along the
midline of the right femur will intersect with the sacral hiatus. The natal
cleft does not always correspond to bony midline structures.
• Define the boundaries of the sacral hiatus. This is again a triangle
with the base formed by a line joining the sacral cornua and the apex
representing the lower part of the 4th sacral vertebra. The sacral hiatus
is covered by the sacrococcygeal membrane.
• Direct a short- bevelled 22G or 20G cannula at 60° to the skin from the
midpoint of the line joining the sacral cornua. A small ‘give’ indicates
penetration of the sacrococcygeal membrane. Flatten the cannula or
needle slightly, then advance. If using a cannula, withdraw the stylet
to just behind the cannula before advancing the cannula into the
caudal space. Do not advance the needle or cannula any more than
is necessary. Advancement of a cannula, rather than a needle, may
reduce the incidence of inadvertent dural or vascular puncture. Easy
progression of the cannula is a good prognostic indicator of success.
• Draw up your medications now— this ensures patience to observe any
blood or CSF flow passively up the cannula.
• Use a double- aspiration technique; if the cannula is in a small vein, the
vein may simply collapse with the 1st aspiration. Aspiration should be
repeated during injection of the LA. The commonest reason for a failed
attempt is positioning the needle too caudally.
• Ultrasound can be used to assess the caudal anatomy and to confirm
the spread of the injectate in the caudal extradural space.25
• Levobupivacaine 0.25% is commonly administered. Current guidelines
recommend that doses should not exceed 2.5mg/ kg for caudal
bupivacaine, and the recommended volumes are 0.5mL/k g for blockade
of sacral dermatomes, 1.0mL/ kg for lumbar dermatomes or 1.25mL/ kg
for lower thoracic dermatomes.24 Duration of the block averages 4– 8h.
• Caudal blockade can be extended with clonidine 1–2 micrograms/ kg
but can cause intraoperative hypotension and postoperative sedation.
• Adrenaline has been implicated in cases of spinal ischaemia and should
be avoided.
• Morphine and diamorphine increase the incidence of urinary retention
and should be reserved for surgery in which catheterisation is required.
• Ketamine is no longer recommended, especially in younger children,
because of the potential risk of neuronal apoptosis.


## 頁面 951

930
930 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Posterior
superior
iliac
spine
Sacral
cornu
Sacral
hiatus
Fig. 36.1 Anatomy for caudal block.
Advantages/ complications of caudal analgesia
• Simple, safe and successful, with a wide range of indications.
• Motor block, paraesthesiae, hypotension, urinary retention, inadvertent
dural puncture and intravascular injection can all occur. All these
complications are rare using a single- shot caudal technique.
Continuous caudal epidural analgesia
Caudal injection is restricted in its duration of action. A catheter can be
introduced into the epidural space via the caudal route. It is a safe and ef-
fective method of administering epidural analgesia in infants. The single
curve of the back allows the catheter to thread into the epidural space;
the tip of the catheter should be close to the level of the dermatomes that
need to be blocked.
• Over 2y of age, the development of a lumbosacral curvature tends to
lead to a higher failure rate. However, some authors claim comparable
success rates.
• Because of the proximity of the perineum, a caudal catheter should not
be left in situ for longer than 36h.


## 頁面 952

EPIDUrAL/SUBArACHNOID BLOCK 931
Epidural/ subarachnoid block
(See also % pp. 1114–17.)
Epidural block
(See also % pp. 1164–6.)
Epidural blockade is technically more difficult in children and requires ex-
perience. The ligamentum flavum is less well developed, and the interver-
tebral spaces are narrower. In infants, the epidural space is rarely located
at a depth >15mm and often as superficially as 10mm from the skin. The
technique is similar to that used in adults. Either a midline or a paramedian
approach is acceptable. The NAP3 study demonstrated that paediatric epi-
durals resulted in fewer complications than adults.26 Severe neurological
complications, including fatalities, have been reported in association with
using air to find the epidural space in neonates. The caudal route may rep-
resent a safer alternative with this group.
• Epidural needle: 18G for infants/ children, 19G for neonates/ infants
(catheter ‘end- hole’ only).
• For suitable doses, see Table 36.15.
Subarachnoid block
Paediatric spinal anaesthesia can be useful for herniotomy in neonates. The
procedure requires training specific to paediatrics and an experienced assistant.
• The infant needs to be firmly gripped in the lateral or sitting position.
The needle should be directed at right angles to the skin in the midline
below L3, with L5– S1 reported as the safest approach. Prior infiltration
of LA into the skin will help prevent patient movement.
• The block has a rapid onset, but duration is rarely >40min. If sedation
is required during the surgery, the incidence of postoperative apnoea is
comparable with a GA technique.
• Spinal needle: 5cm, 22G.
• For suitable doses, see Table 36.15.
Table 36.15 regional analgesia doses in children
Caudal extradural blockade Sacral: 0.5mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine
Lumbar: 1mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine
Thoracolumbar: 1.25mL/k g (0.25%
bupivacaine diluted with 0.9% sodium chloride)
Supplements to extend duration Clonidine 1– 2 micrograms/ kg
of caudal
Lumbar epidural (intraoperative) 0.75mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine
Thoracic epidural (intraoperative) 0.5mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine
Epidural infusion 0.1% bupivacaine + fentanyl 2 micrograms/
mL (sterile premixed bag)
rate: 0.1– 0.4mL/ kg/ h
Spinal block 0.1mL/ kg of 0.5% ‘heavy’ bupivacaine +
0.06mL for needle dead space
Nerve infusion catheters 0.1– 0.4mL/ kg/ h
Wound catheters 0.1– 0.4mL/ kg/ h
Wound infiltration 1mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine


## 頁面 953

932
932 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Peripheral nerve blocks
PNBs are covered in depth in % Chapter 42. Only additional paediatric-
specific information is covered here.27 refer to % Chapter 42 for advice on
safety and performance of regional nerve blockade. Be advised that paedi-
atric LA doses are quoted as mL/ kg of a specific concentration of a specific
LA, as the volume is important. Do not confuse with maximum doses which
still apply and must be calculated to ensure they are not exceeded (see %
p. 1102).
Ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerve block
(See % pp. 1131–2.) Useful alternative to caudal blockade in herniotomy,
hydrocele and orchidopexy. It does not block pain from traction of
the spermatic cord or visceral peritoneum and is unsuitable for a high
orchidopexy. There is a 10% incidence of femoral nerve block. Should be
avoided for neonatal herniotomy, as the LA may obscure the operating
field. The block can be performed easily under direct vision by the surgeon.
Of note, the entry point is 1cm medial to the ASIS, not 2cm as in adults.
• Dose: 1mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine (retain 1– 2mL for an SC fan
injection laterally, medially and inferiorly).
Dorsal nerve block of penis
(See % p. 1132.) This block is indicated for distal surgery to the penis,
including circumcision, meatoplasty and simple hypospadias repair.
• Also consider ring block at base of penis with 25G or 27G needle, as
penile block does not always block the ventral surface of the penis.
• Dosage: 0.5mL/ kg of 0.5% bupivacaine.
Transversus abdominis plane block
(See % p. 1133.) Indicated for lower abdominal surgery, including
herniotomy, appendicectomy and some laparoscopic surgery.
• Dosage: 1mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine.
Rectus sheath block
(See % pp. 1133–4.) Indicated for midline hernias and single-p ort laparo-
scopic surgery.
• Bilateral block with total dose: 1mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine.
Femoral nerve block
(See % p. 1136.) This block is indicated for surgery to the knee or femur.
• Dose: 0.5mL/ kg of 0.5% bupivacaine.
Sciatic nerve block
(See % pp. 1138–40.) This block is indicated for ankle surgery or lower limb
procedures, in combination with a femoral nerve block.
• Dosage: 0.5mL/ kg of 0.5% bupivacaine.
Axillary block
(See % p. 1122.) This block is indicated for hand and lower arm surgery.
• Dosage: 0.5mL/ kg of 0.5% bupivacaine.


## 頁面 954

DOWN’S SYNDrOME/TrISOMY 21 933
Down’s syndrome/ trisomy 21
Down’s syndrome is the commonest congenital abnormality (1.6 per 1000
deliveries). It is associated with a higher morbidity and mortality and char-
acteristic dysmorphic features, including:
• Impaired global development
• Congenital cardiac defects (40%; predominantly endocardial cushion
defects/ VSD)
• Eisenmenger’s syndrome (especially if there is associated OSA)
• recurrent respiratory tract infection (relative immune deficiency
and a degree of upper airway obstruction from tonsillar/a denoidal
hypertrophy)
• Atlantoaxial instability (30%, but frequently asymptomatic; routine X-r ay
not indicated; avoid excessive neck movement)
• Epilepsy (10%)
• Obesity and potentially difficult venous access
• Hypothyroidism (40%)
• i incidence of gastro- oesophageal reflux
• Prone to hypoventilation (consider IPPV).
Assessment
• Perform careful airway assessment: relatively large tongue, crowding of
mid- facial structures, high arched narrow palate, micrognathia and short,
broad neck.
• Perform careful cardiorespiratory assessment (including investigation).
• Beware asymptomatic disease; optimise where possible, and have a
reduced threshold for postoperative HDU/ ICU.
• Hypotonia (up to 75%) may compromise the airway.
• These patients are prone to atelectasis and respiratory tract infections;
consider humidified O ± physiotherapy.
2
Preoperative
• Often uncooperative (sedative premedications are often helpful; caution
if airway obstructed).
• Drying agents may be useful if hypersalivation (H caution: may have
exaggerated sensitivity to mydriatic/ cardiac effects of atropine).
Postoperative
• Pain management may be problematic; consider regional blocks/L A.
PCA possible in selected patients.
• Parents/ carers often indispensable in managing postoperative agitation.


## 頁面 955

934
934 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Diaphragmatic hernia
Procedure repair of defect in diaphragm either by suturing to
abdominal wall or with a synthetic graft
Time 1– 2h
Pain +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Usually minimal to moderate
Practical techniques GA plus IPPV, arterial line
Preoperative
• 1:3000–4 000 deliveries; 85% left- sided; cardiac anomalies in 20%.
• Diagnosis usually made antenatally on ultrasound. Present in respiratory
distress: i rr, cyanosis, with a scaphoid abdomen. CXr diagnostic.
• Overall mortality of 30% from lung hypoplasia, abnormal pulmonary
vasculature and pulmonary hypertension.
• Usually already intubated and ventilated. Ventilatory support can include
high- frequency oscillation (HFO) and NO.
• For high- risk cases, surgery may need to take place on the special care
baby unit if conventional ventilation is not possible.
• An NGT is essential preoperatively to prevent the stomach and small
bowel in the chest cavity from compressing the lung.
Perioperative
• Cautious ventilation via a face mask; avoid NO.
2
• NGT, 2 × IV cannulae, right radial arterial line (preductal sampling).
• Keep airway pressures <25cmHO (pulmonary hypoplasia and
2
consequent risk of pneumothorax). Use rr to improve ventilation.
• High- dose fentanyl (25 micrograms/ kg) to reduce pulmonary
vasoconstriction response to surgical stress.
Postoperative
• Postoperative ventilation for at least 24h, then attempt to wean.
• Infant may deteriorate within 12h due to pulmonary hypertensive
crises. Pulmonary vasculature is reduced and abnormal l exaggerated
vasoconstrictive response to hypoxaemia and acidosis.
• rarely, if minimal defect, extubate immediately.
Special considerations
• Pulmonary hypertension may be significant. Initial management includes
assisted hyperventilation with 100% O and fluid boluses. Other
2
therapies include epoprostenol, sildenafil and NO.
2
• ECMO is a last resort but has been used.
• To assist weaning, a thoracic epidural may be of benefit, inserted either
conventionally or via the caudal route.


## 頁面 956

GASTrOSCHISIS/EXOMPHALOS 935
Gastroschisis/ exomphalos
Procedure replacement of abdominal contents into the
abdominal cavity
Time 2h
Pain ++/ +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Moderate
Practical techniques GA + IPPV; NGT; arterial line
Preoperative
• Usually diagnosed in utero. Incidence of 1:3000– 4000.
• Gastroschisis: defect in the anterior abdominal wall, usually on the
right, causing herniation of abdominal contents without a covering
sac; associated with LBW and thickened bowel wall due to exposure
to amniotic fluid; associated with younger maternal age and lower
socioeconomic status. repair is an urgent procedure.
• Exomphalos: failure of the gut to return to the abdominal cavity during
fetal development l persistent herniation through the umbilical cord
which covers it. May include other abdominal organs. i incidence of
associated anomalies, including cardiac disease.
• Exposed abdominal contents result in large evaporative heat and water
losses and predispose to infection. They should initially be covered with
cling film or equivalent.
Perioperative
• May already be intubated. Otherwise intubate conventionally.
• Intraoperative analgesia: fentanyl 1.5– 10 micrograms/ kg or epidural if
extubation within 48h is contemplated.
Postoperative
• Ventilate in the head- up position, especially if the abdomen is tense.
• Assiduous attention to fluid balance. There may be large abdominal
losses of crystalloid and protein.
Special considerations
• Lines should be sited in the arms, as abdominal distension may impair
venous return from the lower body.
• Consider inserting a percutaneous long line or central line for parenteral
feeding— postoperative oedema makes cannulation difficult.
• Manual ventilation is useful to assess the effect of replacement of
abdominal contents on lung compliance to determine the correct
degree of abdominal reduction before closure.
• Complete reduction is not always possible. A silo is then created
around the extra- abdominal contents to be gradually reduced on the
ICU. Fluid loss and infection are major issues in these cases.


## 頁面 957

936
936 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Procedure Ligation of fistula plus anastomotic repair of
oesophageal atresia
Time 2h
Pain +++
Position Left lateral for right thoracotomy
Blood loss Moderate
Practical techniques GA + IPPV; arterial line
Preoperative
• Incidence of 1:3500; 85% comprise oesophageal atresia with distal
fistula. Majority diagnosed in utero; always exclude in cases of
polyhydramnios.
• High incidence of prematurity (30%) and cardiac disease (25%).
• Presents with choking, cyanosis on feeding and inability to pass NGT.
• Constant risk of pulmonary aspiration. A double- lumen replogle tube
in the oesophagus allows irrigation and suction.
Perioperative
• Inhalational or IV induction. Gentle mask ventilation to minimise gastric
distension via a fistula.
• Careful ETT placement. Confirm symmetrical ventilation with the
tube distal to the fistula. Manual ventilation may be necessary to assess
lung compliance after ligation of the fistula, to assist in repair of the
oesophagus and to periodically reinflate the left lung. Surgical retraction
may impede ventilation.
• Intraoperative access will be needed to pass the transanastomotic tube
nasally to facilitate oesophageal repair.
• Intraoperative analgesia: fentanyl (5– 10 micrograms/ kg) or epidural by
either the thoracic or caudal route, if early weaning is anticipated.
• The operation is performed via thoracoscopic repair or via a right
thoracotomy extrapleural approach (unless right-s ided aortic arch
present; 5% of cases; necessitates left thoracotomy).
• Thoracoscopic compression of the ipsilateral lung makes desaturation
common; direct compression of vascular structures (IVC and the right
atrium) reduces venous return. CO absorption l hypercarbia and
2
acidosis which may be poorly tolerated by these neonates.28
Postoperative
• Majority are ventilated postoperatively, especially if oesophageal repair
is under tension. Critical to secure the NGT or transanastomotic tube.
Special considerations
• The fistula is normally situated on the posterior aspect of the trachea,
just proximal to the carina. An FOB can be used to confirm ETT
position.


## 頁面 958

PATENT DUCTUS ArTErIOSUS 937
Patent ductus arteriosus
Procedure Ligation or clipping of ductus arteriosus
Time 1h
Pain +
Position Left thoracotomy
Blood loss Usually minimal. Occasionally massive if the
vessel is torn
Practical techniques IPPV, fentanyl
Preoperative
• Small premature babies: 25% of premature infants <1.5kg recovering
from hyaline membrane disease have a patent ductus arteriosus.
Associated with other cardiac anomalies.
• Indications are for failure of medical treatment which include ibuprofen,
indometacin or paracetamol, ventilator dependence and risk of
developing bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
Perioperative
• High- risk group. Operation may be undertaken on the special care baby
unit.
• Patient is usually already ventilated with full monitoring.
• Adequate IV access for transfusion. Arterial monitoring.
• IPPV with O/ air and fentanyl up to 10 micrograms/ kg with a low dose
2
of volatile agent.
• Active heat conservation.
• Keep saturations < 96% to avoid retinopathy of prematurity.
• Local infiltration for analgesia, interpleural block by surgeon or thoracic
epidural if early weaning considered.
Postoperative
• Postoperative ventilation until stable, then attempt to wean.
Special considerations
• Sudden ligation of the ductus may precipitate an acute rise in systemic
BP and increase the risk of intraventricular haemorrhage. The duct
should be clamped gently, or alternatively the concentration of the
volatile agent can be temporarily i.
• Older children requiring patent ductus arteriosus occlusion tend to be
fit, although some present with cardiac failure. The procedure can be
performed percutaneously as a day case using a coil device.


## 頁面 959

938
938 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Pyloric stenosis
Procedure Splitting the pylorus muscle longitudinally down
to the mucosa
Time 30min
Pain +
Position Supine
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques GA + IPPV, ? rSI
Preoperative
• Incidence of 1:350 births; more common in first- born ♂ ; 80% are ♂ ;
10% are premature.
• Present with biochemical abnormalities, notably hypochloraemic
alkalosis. May be dehydrated. Operation is never urgent, and full
resuscitation should occur.
• Electrolytes, particularly chloride and HCO– , and pH should be within
3
normal limits, with chloride ≥100mmol/ L.
Perioperative
• No complete agreement, but there is a risk of pulmonary aspiration
from gastric outflow obstruction.
• An NGT is mandatory and will be in situ. Aspirate, and do not remove.
It does not reduce the effect of cricoid pressure and may act as an
escape valve if mask ventilation increases intragastric pressure.
• IV access is usually in place. Consider rSI ± cricoid pressure if there is
excessive NG loss (>2mL/ kg/ h).
• Fentanyl (1 microgram/ kg) plus paracetamol IV. Local infiltration (up to
1mL/ kg of 0.25% bupivacaine ± adrenaline) pre- incision.
• Can be performed laparoscopically, in which case a rectus sheath block
may be useful.
• Extubate awake in the left lateral position.
Postoperative
• remove the NGT at the end of the procedure unless mucosa breached.
• Give paracetamol regularly and PO morphine PrN.
• Feed within 6h, but maintain IV fluids until feeding is established.
• Apnoea alarm overnight.
Special considerations
• resuscitate with 5% glucose/ 0.45% sodium chloride plus 20mmol/ L
potassium chloride (HCO– <32mmol/ L). More severe cases will
3
require 0.9% sodium chloride. replace NG loss with 0.9% sodium
chloride.


## 頁面 960

INTUSSUSCEPTION 939
Intussusception
Procedure reduction of invaginated bowel
Time 1– 3h
Pain +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Moderate, may be large
Practical techniques rSI + IPPV
Preoperative
• Intussusception is the commonest cause of obstruction in infants over
2mo of age; incidence of 2:1000 births.
• Invagination of the bowel into an adjacent lower segment, usually at the
terminal ileum or ileocaecal valve. rarely caused by a polyp or Meckel’s
diverticulum (5% of cases).
• Presents with paroxysmal pain, blood and mucus in stool (redcurrant
jelly stool), and a sausage- shaped mass in the right abdomen.
• 70% of cases are reduced by air or barium enema.
• Child may be profoundly shocked. Urgent fluid resuscitation with gastric
decompression and electrolyte correction will be needed and blood
may be required. Delay can result in perforated or necrotic bowel. Fluid
loss may be greater than expected.
Perioperative
• rSI. retain the NGT in situ.
• Fentanyl 2– 5 micrograms/ kg plus volatile agent.
• Two cannulae of adequate size. CVP line in severe cases.
• routine monitoring, temperature measurement and urinary catheter.
• Prolonged intussusception with ischaemic gut requiring resection often
leads to metabolic acidosis and septic shock. Admission to a paediatric
ICU will be required.
Postoperative
• TAP block, wound catheter or local wound infiltration, and morphine
NCA.
Special considerations
These children can be very challenging. They will have had unsuccessful
barium enema in the district general hospital and air enema in the regional
centre, both with sedation. They may be inadequately resuscitated. Venous
access is often challenging and a significant resuscitation is often necessary.


## 頁面 961

940
940 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Herniotomy
Procedure Excision of patent processus vaginalis
Time 30min
Pain ++
Position Supine
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques LMA/ SV or ETT/ IPPV; spinal, caudal or local
infiltration
Preoperative
• Majority are fit ASA 1 children. More common in boys.
• 20% of preterm babies present for surgery at 740w post- conceptual age
or when ready to leave the special care baby unit.
Perioperative
• Children: inhalational or IV induction with LMA, then caudal or
ilioinguinal block and intraoperative opioids if necessary.
• Infants: intubate with controlled ventilation. With neonates, avoid
ilioinguinal block, as spread of LA may obscure the surgical field. Use
either caudal or postoperative infiltration.
• Paracetamol IV or diclofenac suppository.
Postoperative
• Day case: regular paracetamol and ibuprofen.
• Admit term babies <4w and ex- premature infants <60w post-
conceptual age overnight for SpO and apnoea alarm monitoring.
2
Special considerations
• No consensus on the most appropriate regional block. Caudal blockade
is indicated for bilateral herniotomy repair and children <20kg.
Ilioinguinal block is effective in children >5kg.
• Laparoscopic repair becoming common. Local infiltration adequate.
• The ex- premature baby may be small and O- dependent with chronic
2
lung disease. Postoperative apnoea and bradycardia are documented
risks associated with GA for this group. Avoid hypocarbia and
hypothermia; O saturations of 90– 95% are acceptable. Caffeine
2
(10mg/ kg IV) given at induction reduces the risk of apnoea by 70%.
• To avoid a GA in the high- risk premature infant, a spinal technique may
be used. This may be technically difficult and complicated by a bloody
or dry tap. It is too short- acting for bilateral repair. Single- shot caudal is
an alternative method. Supplementary sedation results in the same risk
of postoperative apnoea as with GA.
• A strangulated hernia that does not reduce is an emergency and
requires fluid resuscitation and an NGT. Precautions should be taken
against regurgitation and aspiration.


## 頁面 962

CIrCUMCISION/HYPOSPADIAS rEPAIr 941
Circumcision/ hypospadias repair
Procedure removal of prepuce (foreskin)/ restoration of ur-
ethral opening to the tip of the penis
Time Circumcision: 20min; hypospadias: 1– 3h
Pain ++
Position Supine
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques LMA + SV/ IPPV, caudal/ penile block/r ing block
Preoperative
• Circumcision: common day case procedure; move towards conservative
management, including simple stretch or preputioplasty.
• Hypospadias is usually an isolated problem, but there may be an
association with certain rare dysmorphic syndromes.
• Obtain consent for a regional block and suppository.
Perioperative
• Inhalational or IV induction.
• If procedure <1h, LMA plus SV.
• If procedure >1h, LMA or ETT plus IPPV.
• regional block: caudal or penile block (if hypospadias is distal) (see
% pp. 929–30; % p. 931; % p. 1132).
• Paracetamol IV and diclofenac Pr.
Postoperative
• regular paracetamol and NSAIDs. Hypospadias: consider morphine
NCA (not always necessary).
• Topical lidocaine gel can be applied frequently, without exceeding the
toxic dose.
Special considerations
• Hypospadias repair: may be a simple procedure, e.g. meatal
advancement and glanduloplasty, or extensive involving a buccal mucosa
graft. Adjust anaesthetic technique accordingly.
• A regional block should be performed prior to the surgery. Avoid
erection with a regional block plus an adequate depth of anaesthesia.
• There is no consensus as to the optimal strategy for pain relief. Caudal
is technically easier in infants, and penile block may be more suitable in
children over 10kg. ring block is easier in boys >5kg. All methods are
effective.
• Circumcision is one of the most painful day case procedures; parents
should be warned and advised to apply topical gel regularly and
continue paracetamol for several days.


## 頁面 963

942
942 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Orchidopexy
Procedure release of undescended testis into scrotum
Time 45min
Pain ++
Position Supine
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques SV, LMA + regional block
Preoperative
• Boys, usually over 2y (2% of population).
• Common day case procedure.
• Obtain consent for a suppository and regional block.
Perioperative
• Inhalational or IV induction. LMA.
• regional technique: caudal, ilioinguinal block or local infiltration.
• Paracetamol IV or diclofenac Pr.
• Give supplementary opioids, if indicated.
Postoperative
• regular paracetamol and ibuprofen. PO morphine if necessary.
Special considerations
• Adequate analgesia is difficult if the testis is high. In this case, aim for
a high- volume, low- concentration mid-t horacic caudal block. Use
1.25mL/ kg volume of 0.25% bupivacaine with 0.9% sodium chloride
(observing maximum bupivacaine dose) (see % pp. 929–30; % p. 931).
• If an ilioinguinal block is used, only the anterior part of the scrotum is
anaesthetised; use local infiltration for the scrotal incision (see %
p. 932; % pp. 1131–2).
• Testicular traction, even with a seemingly adequate blockade, may
lead to intraoperative bradycardia or laryngospasm, especially with
an ilioinguinal block. Surgery should be stopped, and anaesthesia
deepened; supplementary opioids may be required.
• Suspected torsion of the testis is a surgical emergency, and the need for
an rSI will have to be considered. Local infiltration is adequate.
• A high testis may need surgery in two stages. The 1st procedure is to
identify the testis and, if possible, bring it down to the inguinal ring.
This is usually performed laparoscopically and will require intubation,
controlled ventilation with intraoperative opioids, IV paracetamol and
diclofenac Pr.


## 頁面 964

CLEFT LIP AND PALATE 943
Cleft lip and palate
Procedure repair of defect in upper lip and palate
Time 2– 3h
Pain ++
Position Supine, head ring, shoulder support
Blood loss Minimal for cleft lip. Moderate for cleft palate
Practical techniques IPPV. Armoured or rAE tube
Preoperative
• Incidence of 1:300– 600 births but can be 1:25 with a family history.
• Both the lip and palate are involved together in 50% of cases.
• Isolated cleft palate incidence of 1:2000 live births. i incidence of
congenital abnormalities.
• Associated syndromes often involve a difficult airway, e.g. Pierre– robin,
Treacher Collins and Goldenhar syndromes. Therefore, make a careful
assessment of the airway.
• Discuss risks and complications.
• Administer IM atropine 20 micrograms/ kg 30min preoperatively if a
difficult airway is suspected.
Perioperative
• Inhalational or IV induction. If difficult airway is suspected, consider
inhalational induction with CPAP if necessary. Intubate deep with
the child breathing spontaneously or following muscle relaxant.
Videolaryngoscopy may be necessary.
• Caution when surgeon inserts gag. A preformed rAE tube may become
obstructed or kinked, especially the smaller sizes.
• Use a throat pack, and make sure the eyes are protected.
• Encourage LA infiltration to improve analgesia and d blood loss.
• Fentanyl (2– 4 micrograms/ kg) before LA, then morphine 50– 150
micrograms/ kg plus paracetamol IV.
• Dexamethasone 0.25mg/ kg + three postoperative doses to prevent
postoperative swelling.
• Consider an infraorbital nerve block for cleft lip repair.
Postoperative
• Extubate awake. Suction the pharynx early and carefully to prevent
damage to the repair.
• Nasal stents may be inserted to maintain patency of the airway. A
tongue stitch is rarely used.
• regular paracetamol and ibuprofen. IV morphine may be required
initially.


## 頁面 965

944
944 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Special considerations
• Intubation is usually uncomplicated.
• The laryngoscope blade rarely lodges in the cleft. If there is a problem,
a roll of gauze can fill the gap.
• Prolonged surgery may cause a swollen tongue from pressure of the
mouth gag.
• Cleft palate repair can produce upper airway obstruction, and extreme
care is needed for extubation.
• With airway problems, opioids should be given cautiously.
Postoperative monitoring should include SpO and apnoea alarm.
2
• Cleft lip is usually repaired at 3mo, and cleft palate at 6–9 mo. The lip
may be repaired at the neonatal stage to improve the scar and assist
maternal bonding. There is little evidence to support this.


## 頁面 966

CONGENITAL TALIPES EqUINOVArUS 945
Congenital talipes equinovarus
Procedure Correction of club foot abnormality
Time 45– 90 min
Pain ++
Position Supine, sometimes prone for posterior release
Blood loss Minimal
Practical techniques SV + LMA or ETT + IPPV, caudal
If prone, then ETT + IPPV, caudal
Preoperative
• Occurs in 1:1000 births.
• Usually an isolated anomaly but may occur in association with some
myopathic diseases, hence i theoretical risk of MH.
• Obtain consent for a suppository and regional block.
Perioperative
• Inhalational or IV induction. If prone, intubate and ventilate. Give
additional opioids, if indicated.
• Extended caudal blockade: 1mL/ kg of 0.25% levobupivacaine +
clonidine (see % pp. 929–30; % p. 931).
• Paracetamol IV and diclofenac Pr.
Postoperative
regular paracetamol and ibuprofen plus PO morphine PrN.
Special considerations
For prolonged pain relief, either top up the caudal at the end of the pro-
cedure by using an indwelling epidural catheter or extend the duration of
the block by adding clonidine (1– 2 micrograms/ kg) to the initial dose of
bupivacaine.


## 頁面 967

946
946 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Femoral osteotomy
Procedure Stabilising the hip in congenital dislocation by re-
aligning the proximal femur
Time 2h
Pain +++
Position Supine
Blood loss Moderate/ potentially large
Practical techniques SV + LMA or ETT + IPPV, caudal/e pidural
Preoperative
• Usually an isolated defect. More common in girls or where there is a
family history.
• Obtain consent for a regional block and suppository.
Perioperative
• Inhalational or IV induction. Adequate IV access.
• Caudal block plus clonidine (see % pp. 929–30; % p. 931) if hip spica to
be applied.
• Alternatively, femoral nerve block + LA to skin incision.
• Lumbar epidural if high osteotomy (see % p. 931).
• Intraoperative opioids if regional block not possible (% pp. 926–8).
• Paracetamol IV and diclofenac Pr.
• Employ heat conservation measures.
• Attention to blood loss.
Postoperative
• A hip spica provides support and helps with pain relief.
• Extended caudal or morphine NCA, with regular NSAIDs and
paracetamol.
• Epidural infusion (Table 36.15) with regular paracetamol, NSAIDs + PO
morphine PrN.
Special considerations
• Blood loss may be extensive if revision surgery. Consider cell saver.
• A hip spica complicates urinary retention in girls.


## 頁面 968

INHALED FOrEIGN BODY 947
Inhaled foreign body
Procedure removal of foreign body from bronchial tree
Time 30– 60min
Pain +
Position Supine
Blood loss Nil
Practical techniques SV or IPPV
Preoperative
• Commonest reason for bronchoscopy in the 1– 3y age group.
• May present as an emergency acute airway obstruction.
• Presentation of lower airway obstruction may occur several days
after a history of coughing. Peanut oil is an irritant and leads to
mucosal oedema and chemical pneumonitis. CXr shows characteristic
hyperinflation of affected side during expiration, but a foreign body is
not always visible.
• Treat symptoms as indicated, e.g. dehydration, pneumonia, wheeze.
Perioperative
• Inhalational induction is usual to avoid displacing the object further. Use
100% O with sevoflurane.
2
• TIVA is becoming a more popular maintenance technique.
• Apply topical anaesthesia to the vocal cords (4% lidocaine, up to 3mg/
kg), and consider a drying agent (atropine 20 micrograms/k g IM 30min
preoperatively or 10 micrograms/ kg IV at induction, or glycopyrronium
5 micrograms/ kg IM or IV).
• Prior to bronchoscopy, maintain airway with a face mask or LMA.
• rigid bronchoscopy: the Storz bronchoscope has an attachment for a
T- piece. Check compatibility before the procedure.
• For foreign objects in the upper airways, maintain SV. If tracheal/b all–
valve obstruction suspected, IPPV is contraindicated.
• If the foreign body is in the lower airway, then IPPV with a muscle
relaxant is acceptable, since the object will be pushed distally by
the bronchoscope until it can be grasped by forceps. Give assisted
ventilation via a T- piece or high- frequency jet ventilation.
• This may be a difficult surgical procedure.
Postoperative
• If bronchoscopy is traumatic, give dexamethasone 0.25mg/k g IV, then
two doses 8- hourly of 0.125mg/ kg.
• Consider physiotherapy, bronchodilators and antibiotics as indicated.


## 頁面 969

948
948 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Sedation
• The expansion of imaging techniques and diagnostic and therapeutic
interventions has led to a rise in demand for sedation services.29
• The safe sedation of children for procedures requires a systematic
approach. Compared with GA, sedation is neither cheaper nor safer.
• Anaesthetists are not always available to administer sedation, and other
medical or nursing personnel may be involved. Sedation guidelines are
essential29 and monitoring of SpO is mandatory. With appropriate
2
planning, nurse-l ed sedation services have been developed at several
centres following strict protocols. The children are fasted conventionally
but allowed unrestricted clear fluids.
• Safety is paramount— facilities must include an airway trolley and
monitoring and resuscitation equipment, together with all personnel
necessary to sedate the child and carry out the specific procedure. All
standard anaesthetic equipment should be available for resuscitation.
• Each sedated child must be supervised by an appropriate nurse or
doctor trained in paediatric resuscitation. Experienced medical staff
must be immediately available to assist with sedation problems or
resuscitation. There must be a contingency for overnight admission if
recovery is prolonged.
• The adult concept of sedation with verbal contact maintained is not
practical in children. There may be little difference between deep
sedation, as defined by the American Academy of Pediatrics, and
uncontrolled anaesthesia. Ideal conditions achieve depression of the
nervous system, allowing the procedures to occur, with preservation of
airway reflexes. In practice, this is difficult to achieve.
• It is important not to confuse sedation with analgesia. Painful
procedures may require a topical anaesthetic cream, infiltration with
LAs and occasionally systemic opioids.
• Contraindications include children with potential airway issues, apnoeic
episodes, respiratory disease, raised ICP, risk of pulmonary aspiration
and epilepsy.
• Medications used:
• Chloral hydrate 50– 100 micrograms/ kg for younger children.
• Midazolam (0.5mg/ kg PO or incremental bolus doses of 0.05–
0.1mg/ kg IV, up to a maximum of 0.4mg/ kg) can produce good
conditions for sedation; additional property of amnesia.
• Ketamine (6– 10mg/ kg PO or 0.5– 1mg/ kg IV boluses every 10–
15min) is indicated for short, painful procedures and may be used in
combination with midazolam. Emergence delirium is less of a problem
with children, but a drying agent is often required.
• Propofol can be used alone or in combination with remifentanil for
endoscopy sedation, but the use of these drugs should be reserved
for anaesthetists.29
• Dexmedetomidine 1 microgram/ kg and/ or infusion 0.2– 1
micrograms/ kg/h . Can cause bradycardia.
• Surprisingly young children can tolerate scans awake with
encouragement, careful explanation and parental presence.


## 頁面 970

MEDICAL PrOBLEMS 949
Medical problems
Acute laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)
• Croup occurs predominantly in epidemics in autumn and early spring.
The peak age of incidence is 6mo to 2y. It is viral in aetiology. The
majority of cases are due to parainfluenza, but influenza and respiratory
syncytial virus are possible.
• Symptoms are coryzal for the first few days but then progress to a
characteristic barking cough/ hoarseness with profuse secretions and
occasional dysphagia. Pyrexia is mild or absent.
• The larynx, trachea and bronchi are all involved and become
oedematous, leading to the onset of stridor. An anxious child will
exacerbate the condition, as the trachea will tend to collapse on
inspiration.
• The majority of children respond to conservative measures and
reassurance. In severe cases, steroids (dexamethasone 0.25mg/k g IV
followed by two further doses 8- hourly of 0.125mg/ kg) and nebulised
adrenaline (0.5mg/ kg, up to a maximum of 5mg) are required.
• 10% of children are admitted, and 1% will require intubation.
• The majority of children have a single isolated episode.
Acute epiglottitis
• This is an acute life- threatening infection caused by Hib. It most
commonly presents at 2– 3y.
• There is a rapid onset of oedema of the epiglottis and aryepiglottic
folds. The child has a high temperature, usually >39.5°C, and presents
sitting or leaning forwards, with drooling saliva, and unable to swallow,
with the tongue pushed forwards. Inspiratory and expiratory stridor is
rapidly progressive and is a late sign.
• Acute epiglottitis is a medical emergency. The antibiotic of choice is
ceftriaxone (50mg/ kg IV once daily). Intubation is indicated in 60% of
cases. In some centres, all children are routinely intubated.
• Following the introduction of the Hib vaccine, this condition is now
rare.
Anaesthetic management of croup and acute epiglottitis
• The differential diagnosis between croup and epiglottitis is not always
obvious. If epiglottitis is even remotely suspected, there must be liaison
with an ENT surgeon at consultant level.
• Induction occurs in the anaesthetic room or operating theatre, with the
full range of appropriate equipment and monitoring available.
• During anaesthesia, the ENT surgeon should be scrubbed in theatre,
with the tracheostomy set open.
• Traditionally, IV access has been contraindicated prior to induction
because of the risk of acute glottic closure. However, the use of a
topical cream facilitates an atraumatic venepuncture. Unless access is
obviously difficult, cannulation should proceed before anaesthesia.
• Inhalational induction is performed in the sitting position, with
sevoflurane in 100% O. Once anaesthetised, the child can be moved
2
to a more recumbent position and maintained with sevoflurane, up to
concentrations of 8%, if needed. CPAP should be routinely applied, but
the airway is not usually difficult to maintain.


## 頁面 971

950
950 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• In croup, laryngoscopy is usually straightforward, but the ETT size
required may be surprisingly small. Start with one size smaller than
normal. Older children may require a tube that has been cut to a
longer length. If possible, once the airway is secure, the child should be
reintubated nasally since this is better tolerated. Profuse secretions are
always a problem and frequent suction is necessary. Intubation is usually
required for at least 2– 3d, and bronchoscopy is indicated if an air leak
around the tube fails to develop.
• With epiglottitis, intubation may be exceedingly difficult. Laryngoscopy
often reveals an abnormal anatomy with no obvious glottic opening.
Careful inspection or pushing gently on the chest may reveal movement
of small amounts of mucus, indicating tidal flow. The child should be
intubated, using a stylet, so that the ETT can be immediately railroaded,
if necessary. The tube size will be smaller than predicted.
• Once intubation has been achieved, oedema rapidly settles. Following
demonstration of a leak around the tube, extubation is normally
possible within 36h. Dexamethasone is often given prior to extubation
to reduce laryngeal oedema.


## 頁面 972

PAEDIATrIC ADVANCED LIFE SUPPOr T 951
Paediatric advanced life support
Cardiopulmonary arrest in children is usually 2° to decompensated respira-
tory or circulatory failure rather than cardiac in origin. The commonest
arrest scenario in children is bradycardia proceeding to asystole—a re-
sponse to severe hypoxia and acidosis. Oxygenation, ventilation and good-
quality chest compressions should therefore be a priority of management
(Fig. 36.2).
• Performing chest compression is tiring; if possible, rotate team
members every 2min.
• VF is relatively uncommon but may complicate hypothermia, tricyclic
poisoning and children with pre- existing cardiac disease (Fig. 36.3).
• Many parents wish to be present at resuscitation. A team member
should be available to explain the process and provide support.
• Adopt a SAFE approach:
• Shout for help.
• Approach with care.
• Free the patient from immediate danger.
• Evaluate the patient’s ABC.
• Assess the airway and breathing first. Give five rescue breaths (chest
seen to rise and fall) before assessing the circulation. Each breath should
take about 1–1 .5s.
• Check the carotid pulse in a child, but use the brachial pulse in an infant.
Feel for no more than 10s.
• Commence basic life support using a ratio of 15 compressions:2
ventilations at 100– 120 compressions/ min (five cycles). Each
compression should depress the sternum one- third of the
anteroposterior (AP) diameter (74cm in infants and 5cm in children).
• Chest compressions should be started if a central pulse cannot be
palpated or the child has a pulse rate <60bpm with poor perfusion.
• Where no vascular access is present, immediate IO access is
recommended.
• Once the airway has been secured, chest compressions should be
continued at 100– 120/ min uninterrupted, with breaths administered at
a rate of 10– 12/ min.
• Once restoration of spontaneous circulation (rOSC) is achieved,
ventilate the child at 12– 20 breaths/ min to normalise PaCO.
2


## 頁面 973

952 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Unresponsive
Shout for help
Open airway
Not breathing normally
5 Rescue breaths
No signs of life
15 Chest compressions
2 Rescue breaths
15 Chest compressions
Call resuscitation team
(1 min CPR first, if alone)
Fig. 36.2 Paediatric basic life support. reproduced with the kind permission of
resuscitation Council UK.


## 頁面 974

PAEDIATrIC ADVANCED LIFE SUPPOr T 953
Fig. 36.3 Paediatric advanced life support. reproduced with the kind permission of
resuscitation Council UK.


## 頁面 975

954 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Asystole and pulseless electrical activity
This is a more common arrest scenario in children (Fig. 36.4).
• Continue CPr using 15 compressions:2 breaths with high- flow O.
2
• If intubated, continue uninterrupted chest compressions and ventilate at
10– 12 breaths/ min.
• Secure IO access if vascular access not possible.
• Give adrenaline 10 micrograms/ kg (0.1mL/ kg of 1:10 000 solution).
repeat at alternate cycles (3– 5min).
• review rhythm every 2min.
If no improvement, consider reversible causes (Box 36.2).
Box 36.2 Reversible causes (4Hs and 4Ts)
Hypoxia Thromboembolism
Hypovolaemia Tension pneumothorax
Hyper- / hypokalaemia Tamponade (cardiac)
Hypothermia Toxins
Ventilate x5 with high-
concentration oxygen
CPR 15:2 100–120/min
for 2min
Intubate and establish
IV or IO access
Adrenaline
10 micrograms/kg every 3–5min
CPR 15:2 100–120/min Consider IV fluid bolus of
for 2min 20mL/kg
Rhythm and pulse check Seek expert help
Fig. 36.4 Asystole or pulseless electrical activity.
Post- resuscitation care
• Titrate O for O saturations of 94– 98%.
2 2
• Maintain CO 4.5– 5.0kPa.
2
• Avoid hypotension. Consider fluids and/ or inotropes.
• Suggested, but no statistical evidence for, mild hypothermia 32–3 4°C.30
• Moderate glucose control.


## 頁面 976

PULSELESS VENTrICULAr TACHYCArDIA 955
Ventricular fibrillation or pulseless
ventricular tachycardia
(See Fig. 36.5.)
Ventilate x5 with high-
concentration oxygen
CPR 15:2 100–120/min until
defibrillator available
Rhythm check
1 x DC shock Adrenaline 10 micrograms/kg
4J/kg or AED IV/IO every 3–5min
Immediately resume Once intubated, give
CPR 15:2 for 2 min uninterrupted compressions
Rhythm check
Further shock at 4J/kg Continue 2-min cycles of
followed by immediate CPR review rhythm/shock/CPR
for 2min while awaiting expert help
Fig. 36.5 Ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia.
Notes
• Continue shocks 4J/ kg every 2min. resume CPr immediately after
defibrillation without checking output.
• Standard automated external defibrillators (AEDs) may be used in
children over 8y. Purpose- made paediatric pads are recommended for
children aged 1– 8y, if available. Below 1y, a manual defibrillator should
be used if available, but an adult AED can be used.
• Give adrenaline 10 micrograms/ kg (= 0.1mL/ kg of 1:10 000 solution)
and amiodarone 5mg/k g after a 3rd shock, once compressions have
been resumed.
• repeat adrenaline every alternate cycle (3– 5min).
• Further antiarrhythmic agents:
• repeat amiodarone 5mg/ kg IV after 5th shock.
• Torsade de pointes/ hypomagnesaemia: magnesium sulfate
25– 50mg/ kg.
• There is no evidence that atropine confers any benefit in asphyxial
bradycardia or asystole.
• Calcium: routine use associated with i mortality. Indicated for
hyperkalaemia, hypocalcaemia and calcium channel blocker overdose.
• Sodium bicarbonate 1mmol/ kg: routine use not recommended.
Indicated for hyperkalaemia and tricyclic overdose.


## 頁面 977

956 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Neonatal resuscitation
Condition Acute neonatal asphyxia during the birth process
Presentation Floppy, blue or pale, Hr <60bpm, diminished re-
spiratory effort
Immediate action Delay cord clamping for at least 1min. Dry, wrap
and warm the baby. Open and clear airway, five
inflation breaths with air (2– 3s at 30cmHO)
2
Follow- up action Cardiac compressions (3:1) at 120/m in if <60bpm,
review ventilation
Investigations record Apgar scores (Table 36.16), take cord gases
Also consider Hypovolaemia, diaphragmatic hernia, pneumo-
thorax. Consider therapeutic hypothermia
Risk factors
• Known fetal distress; Category 1 emergency CS; meconium-s tained
liquor; <35w gestation.
• Prolonged delivery; vaginal breech; instrumental delivery; shoulder
dystocia; multiple births.
• Maternal drugs: opioids, GA for CS.
• Preterm delivery (prognosis is very poor if gestation <23w).
Diagnosis
• A normal newly delivered baby is pink, breathes spontaneously within
15s, has a Hr >100bpm and good muscle tone and is vocal.
• A baby requiring resuscitation is floppy, silent, blue or pale, has a Hr
<100bpm and gasping, diminished or absent respiratory effort (see
Apgar scores in Table 36.16).
Table 36.16 Apgar scores
0 1 2
Colour Pale/ blue Blue extremities Pink
HR (bpm) Absent <100 >100
Response to stimulation Nil Movement Cry
Muscle tone Limp Some flexion Well flexed
Respiratory effort Absent Poor effort/ weak cry Good
Source: data from Apgar A (1953) A proposal for a new method of evaluation of the newborn
infant. Anesth Analg, 32; 250– 9.
Immediate management
• Keep the theatre warm. Dry and wrap the baby. Actively maintain
temperature between 36.5°C and 37.7°C. Keep warm under a radiant
heater. Use polythene wrapping for preterm babies <30w.
• Consider ECG and preductal SpO (right hand). Maintain
2
saturations <95%.


## 頁面 978

NEONATAL rESUSCITATION 957
• Open and clear the airway, but keep the neck in a neutral position.
• routine suctioning is not recommended.
• Give five effective inflation breaths (2– 3s at 30cmHO) initially with air.
2
• Hr should increase; continue ventilating at 30– 40 breaths/ min, until
spontaneous effort is adequate.
• If Hr remains <60bpm, commence chest compressions with thumbs
around the chest, at a compression rate of 120/ min and a ratio of 3:1
breaths. Compress the chest diameter by one- third.
• reassess Hr every 30s.
(See Fig. 36.6.)
Subsequent management
• In the neonate that remains unresponsive despite oxygenation, consider
intubation and drugs (Table 36.17). This is seldom required.
Table 36.17 resuscitating the neonate
40/ 40 35/ 40 30/ 40
gestation gestation gestation
Weight (kg) 3.5 2.5 1.5
ETT ID (mm) 3.5 3.0 2.5
ETT length (cm) 9.5 8.5 7.5
Adrenaline 1:10 000 (IO/ IV) (mL) 0.35– 1.0 0.25– 0.75 0.15– 0.45
Sodium bicarbonate 4.2% IV (mL) 3.5– 7 2.5– 5 1.5– 3
Glucose 10% IV (mL) 17– 35 12– 25 7– 15
Volume IV (O-n egative/ 0.9% sodium 35– 70 25– 50 15– 30
chloride) (mL)
Other considerations
• If response to resuscitation is prompt (required support breaths only
and now making good, spontaneous respiratory effort), return the baby
to the parents.
• For ventilatory depression thought to be due to maternal opioids, give
naloxone 200 micrograms IM.
• Therapeutic hypothermia is indicated for term or near-t erm infants with
moderate to severe hypoxia.
Further reading
resuscitation Council (UK) (2015). Guidelines: Resuscitation and support of transition of babies at
birth. M https:// www.resus.org.uk/ library/ 2015- resuscitation- guidelines/ resuscitation-
and- support- transition- babies- birth


## 頁面 979

958 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Fig. 36.6 Neonatal life support. reproduced with the kind permission of resuscitation
Council UK.


## 頁面 980

THE COLLAPSED, SEPTIC CHILD 959
The collapsed, septic child
Condition Sepsis with hypoperfusion and/ or respiratory failure
progressing to capillary leak and multiorgan failure
Presentation Irritability, inappropriate crying, drowsiness, confu-
sion, poor interaction with parents, lethargy or be-
coming unrousable, along with other features such as
tachypnoea and reduced urine output
Immediate action High- flow O, fluid resuscitation, antibiotics
2
Follow- up action referral to a specialist paediatric critical care unit
Investigations Blood cultures, lactate, urine output
FBC, clotting, U&E, glucose
Also consider Hypovolaemia/ blood loss, anaphylaxis, poisoning,
cardiac abnormality
Risk factors
• Prematurity, immune deficiency, chronic cardiorespiratory disease,
endocarditis, CNS infections.
• Exposure to MrSA, Gram-n egative bacteria, nosocomial infection and
fungi.
Recognition of at- risk child
• Suspected or proven infection plus two out of: temperature <36.5°C
or >38.5°C, tachycardia, altered mental state, prolonged capillary refill
time (>2s), immunocompromise and hypotension.
• Look for signs of warm or cold shock:
• Warm shock: vasodilation, bounding peripheral pulses, wide pulse
pressure
• Cold shock: cool peripheries, capillary refill time >2s, narrow pulse
pressure.
Red flag signs
• Any one sign of the following: lactate >2mmol/ L; extreme tachycardia
or tachypnoea; SpO <90%, grunting, cyanosis, apnoea; reduced level
2
of consciousness, persistent hypotension and non- blanching rash/
mottled skin.
Immediate management
• Aggressive early management improves prognosis. Hypovolaemia is
severe and often under- resuscitated.
• ABC: maintain/ support airway; high- flow O via a non- rebreathing
2
mask; consider ventilatory support ± intubation.
• Rapid fluid boluses of 20mL/ kg of crystalloid/ albumin: 80– 100mL/ kg
may be required to restore normovolaemia.
• Correct hypoglycaemia: 2mL/ kg 10% glucose.
• Inotropic support: if no significant response to fluid, start adrenaline
0.1– 0.5 micrograms/ kg/ min.
• Antibiotics: cefotaxime 50mg/ kg IV 1st line; for 2nd line, discuss with
local microbiology team.
• Early referral to specialist centre.


## 頁面 981

960 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Subsequent management
• Ventilation under sedation and paralysis: target V 4– 7mL/ kg, initial
T
PEEP 5cmHO. Saturation >95%.
2
• Inotropes:
• Cold shock: adrenaline 0.1– 0.5 micrograms/ kg/ min IV
• Warm shock: noradrenaline 0.1– 0.5 micrograms/ kg/ min IV.
• risk of adrenal failure: hydrocortisone 1mg/k g qds IV.
• Consider the possibility of meningitis/ encephalitis and raised ICP.
• Stabilise for transfer and prepare handover documentation. A retrieval
service may be provided by the receiving unit.
Other considerations
• Significant fluid shift from capillary leakage may result in pulmonary
oedema 2° to fluid resuscitation. If drugs are required to intubate
the child, anticipate an exaggerated fall in BP and adjust the dose
accordingly. Use ketamine, fentanyl, rocuronium and cuffed ETT. It is
wise to start inotropes and fluid resuscitation before induction.
Further reading
NHS Children’s Acute Transport Service (CATS) (2020). Clinical guidelines: septic shock. M https://
cats.nhs.uk/ wp- content/ uploads/ guideline- sepsis.pdf
randolph AG, McCulloh rJ (2014). Paediatric sepsis: important considerations for diagnosing and
managing severe infections in infants, children and adolescents. Virulence, 5, 179– 89.


## 頁面 982

STABILISATION OF THE SICK CHILD (PrIOr TO PICU TrANSFEr) 961
Stabilisation of the sick child (prior to
PICU transfer)
• Anaesthetists may be required to assist with the stabilisation of critically
ill children, including difficult airway management, prior to surgery or
transfer.
• Seek early contact and advice from the local paediatric intensive care
retrieval team. Initial resuscitation remains the responsibility of the local
medical teams.
• Frequently involves the coordination of multidisciplinary teams,
including paediatricians, intensivists, anaesthetists and surgeons.
Management of sick children should follow a systematic, evidence-b ased
approach.
• These cases will often take place away from theatres and familiar
surroundings. The availability of a trained assistant is essential.
• Checklists for drugs and equipment, as well as emergency ‘grab bags’,
will improve readiness.
• ‘run- throughs’ or simulation will improve familiarity and identify
potential problems with working in unfamiliar locations.
General principles
Airway and breathing
• Indications for intubation:
• Protection of airway (low conscious level, facial trauma, burns)
• Control of ventilation (respiratory failure, head injury).
• Cuffed tube, if possible (see % p. 360). Avoid precutting smaller tubes.
Capnography should be used.
• If equipment, monitoring or personnel are not optimal, consider risk/
benefits of moving location, e.g. theatres.
• Induction: ketamine (0.5– 2mg/ kg) with rocuronium (1.2mg/k g). Must
be fluid- resuscitated first. Use reduced induction doses if unstable.
• Ventilation: pressure control ventilation usually appropriate. Aim
for normocapnia and O saturations of 94– 98%. PEEP is helpful if
2
volume- resuscitated.
• Sedation: various regimens. Morphine and midazolam infusions are
popular (Table 36.18). Propofol is acceptable for short transfers
(remember analgesia).
Circulation
• IV access. Consider IO, if difficult. Central access may be needed.
• Isotonic fluid for boluses: 20mL/ kg repeated. Be aware that intubation
more likely after 40mL/ kg. Blood transfusion may be required after
40mL/ kg isotonic fluids (see % p. 978 for fluid resuscitation).
• If blood loss is the cause, give blood products early. While waiting for
blood products to arrive, give up to 20mL/ kg fluid in 10mL/ kg fluid
boluses.
• Inotropes may be needed in addition to ongoing fluids/b lood products
to improve haemodynamics. Discuss with your local PICU or transfer
team (Table 36.18). Adrenaline and dopamine can be given peripherally.
• Arterial line may be useful, but rarely essential.


## 頁面 983

962 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
Table 36.18 Infusion regimes of selected PICU drugs
Medication Dosing details
Morphine infusion (sedation) 20– 80 micrograms/ kg/ h
If <50kg, 1mg/ kg in 50mL 1mL/ h = 20 micrograms/ kg/ h
If >50kg, 50mg in 50mL
Midazolam infusion (sedation) 50– 200 micrograms/ kg/ h
If <10kg, 5mg/ kg in 50mL 1mL/ h = 100 micrograms/ kg/ h
If >10kg, 50mg in 50mL
Propofol 2– 5mg/ kg/ h; titrate to effect
Dopamine infusion 2– 10 micrograms/ kg/ min
<15kg 15mg/ kg in 50mL (central access)
1mL/ h = 5 micrograms/ kg/ min of this mix
Halve concentration if giving peripherally
Dopamine infusion 2– 10 micrograms/ kg/ min
>15kg 200mg in 50mL (central access)
80mg in 50mL (peripheral access)
Adrenaline infusion 0.1– 0.5 micrograms/ kg/ min
<15kg 0.3mg/ kg in 50mL
1mL/ h = 0.1 micrograms/ kg/ min of this mix
Noradrenaline infusion 0.1– 0.5 micrograms/ kg/ min
>15kg 4mg in 50mL
Further reading
Many local retrieval service websites include guidelines and drug calculators. For example: Wales
& West Acute Transport for Children service (WATCh). M https:// www.watch.nhs.uk/ about
Managing Emergencies in Paediatric Anaesthesia (MEPA). [Simulation-b ased training] M https://
mepa.org.uk
Spotting the Sick Child. [Education and case studies] M http:// www.spottingthesickchild.com
roberts S, ed. (2019). Paediatric Anaesthesia, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


## 頁面 984

PAEDIATrIC DOSES AND Eq UIPMENT 963
Paediatric doses and equipment
(See Table 36.19.)
Table 36.19 Paediatric quick reference guide
Age Approx- Body Percentage ETT size ETT LMA Suxa- Atropine
imate surface of adult drug (mm) length size meth- dose
weight area dose (cm) onium (micro-
(kg) (m2) (approximate) dose grams) IV
(mg) IV
Term 3.5 0.23 12.5(1/ 8th) 3.5 9 1 7 35
1mo 4.2 0.26 14.5 3.5 10 1 8 40
3mo 6 0.33 15 3.5 10 1.5 12 60
6mo 7.5 0.38 22 3.5/ 4.0 11 1.5 15 75
1y 10 0.47 25(1/ 4) 4.0 12 1.5/ 20 100
2
2y 12 0.53 30 4.5 13 2 24 120
3y 14 0.61 33 4.5/ 5 13/ 2 28 140
14
5y 18 0.73 40 5.0/ 5.5 14.5 2.5 36 180
7y 22 0.86 50(1/ 2) 6.0 15.5 2.5 44 220
10y 30 1.10 60 6.5cuffed 17 3 60 300
12y 38 1.30 75(3/ 4) 7.0cuffed 18 3/4 75 380
Note: weights are approximations only. Patients should be weighed accurately.
Weight/ blood pressure estimation (1– 10y)
• Child’s weight in kg (see % p. 903)
• Normal systolic BP in mmHg = (age in y × 2) + 80.
Airway
• ETT ID in mm = (age in y/4 ) + 4
• ETT length (oral) to lips in cm = (age in y/ 2) + 12
• ETT length (nose) to lips in cm = (age in y/2) + 15
• LMA#1 (cuff volume 4mL): <6.5kg
• LMA#2 (cuff volume 10mL): 6.5– 20kg
• LMA#2.5 (cuff volume 14mL): 20– 30kg
• LMA#3 (cuff volume 20mL): >30kg.
Estimated drug doses
(See also % p. 963.)
• Adrenaline 10 micrograms/ kg
• Aminophylline 5mg/ kg
• Amiodarone 5mg/ kg
• Atropine 10– 20 micrograms/ kg
• Bicarbonate 1mmol/k g (use 4.2% <1y)
• Calcium chloride 0.2mL/ kg of 10% solution slowly
• Calcium gluconate 0.6mL/ kg of 10% solution

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 36.19 Paediatric quick reference guide |
| --- |
| Age Approx- Body Percentage ETT size ETT LMA Suxa- Atropine imate surface of adult drug (mm) length size meth- dose weight area dose (cm) onium (micro- (kg) (m2) (approximate) dose grams) IV (mg) IV |
| Term 3.5 0.23 12.5(1/ 8th) 3.5 9 1 7 35 1mo 4.2 0.26 14.5 3.5 10 1 8 40 3mo 6 0.33 15 3.5 10 1.5 12 60 6mo 7.5 0.38 22 3.5/ 4.0 11 1.5 15 75 1y 10 0.47 25(1/ 4) 4.0 12 1.5/ 20 100 2 2y 12 0.53 30 4.5 13 2 24 120 3y 14 0.61 33 4.5/ 5 13/ 2 28 140 14 5y 18 0.73 40 5.0/ 5.5 14.5 2.5 36 180 7y 22 0.86 50(1/ 2) 6.0 15.5 2.5 44 220 10y 30 1.10 60 6.5cuffed 17 3 60 300 12y 38 1.30 75(3/ 4) 7.0cuffed 18 3/4 75 380 |
| Note: weights are approximations only. Patients should be weighed accurately. |


## 頁面 985

964 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
• Cefotaxime 50mg/ kg
• Diazepam 0.1mg/ kg IV; 0.5mg/ kg Pr
• Glucose (10%) 2mL/k g
• Ketamine 2mg/ kg
• Lorazepam 0.1mg/ kg for status epilepticus (repeatable after 10min)
• Magnesium 25– 50mg/ kg
• Naloxone 0.1mg/ kg
• Neostigmine 50 micrograms/k g
• Paraldehyde 0.1mg/ kg
• Phenytoin 10– 20mg/ kg
• Salbutamol 2.5mg nebuliser.
Circulation
• Blood volume: 75mL/k g (1– 10y), 70mL/ kg (>10y)
• Fluid bolus: 20mL/ kg.
These estimations are not valid for premature infants and are intended as
rough guides only.31


## 頁面 986

PAEDIATrIC DOSES AND Eq UIPMENT 965
Further reading
roberts S, ed. (2019). Paediatric Anaesthesia, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
James I, Walker I, eds. (2013). Core Topics In Paediatric Anaesthesia. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bingham r, Lloyd Thomas A, Sury M, eds. (2007). Hatch and Sumner’s Textbook of Paediatric
Anaesthesia, 3rd edn. London: Hodder Arnold.
Baum VC, O’Flaherty JE (2006). Anaesthesia for Genetic, Metabolic and Dysmorphic Syndromes of
Childhood, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
Black A, McEwan A (2004). Paediatric and Neonatal Anaesthesia: Anaesthesia in a Nutshell. Edinburgh:
Butterworth- Heinemann.
References
1 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2015). Intravenous fluid therapy in children and
young people in hospital. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng29
2 resuscitation Council (2015). Fluid administration for volume resuscitation. In: European
Paediatric Life Support Manual, 4th edn; pp. 52– 3.
3 Mihara T, Asakura A, Owada G, et al. (2017). A network meta-a nalysis of the clinical properties
of various types of supraglottic airway device in children. Anaesthesia, 72, 1251– 64.
4 ritchie-M cLean, Ferrier V, Clevenger B, et al. (2018). Using middle finger to determine the in-
ternal diameter of uncuffed tracheal tubes in paediatrics. Anaesthesia, 73, 1207– 13.
5 Chambers NA, ramgolam A, Sommerfield D, et al. (2018). Cuffed vs. uncuffed tracheal tubes
in children: a randomised controlled trial comparing leak, tidal volume and complications.
Anaesthesia, 73, 160– 8.
6 royal Berkshire NHS Foundation Trust (2014). Your child’s general anaesthetic – magic milk and
squidgy masks. M https:// www.youtube.com/ watch?v=0qfFL2CGkU0
7 O’Sullivan M, Wong G (2013). Preinduction techniques to relieve anxiety in children undergoing
general anaesthesia. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain, 13, 196– 9.
8 Elliott AB, Holley AL, ross AC, et al. (2018). A prospective study comparing perioperative anx-
iety and posthospital behavior in children with autism spectrum disorder vs typically developing
children undergoing outpatient surgery. Pediatr Anesth, 28, 142– 8.
9 Wilkinson K, Cranston AJ (2018). Safeguarding for anaesthetists: working to protect children.
Anaesth Intensive Care Med, 19, 433– 6.
10 royal College of Anaesthetists, Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain and
Ireland (2016). Protecting children in theatre. M https:// www.youtube.com/ watch?v=JpxXd6C
1YrE&feature=youtu.be
11 Association of Anaesthetists, Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland,
royal College of Anaesthetists, College of Anaesthesiologists of Ireland (2019). Joint profes-
sional guidance on the use of general anaesthesia in young children. M https:// rcoa.ac.uk/ news/
joint- professional- guidance- use- general-a naesthesia- young- children
12 Kelly CJ, Walker rW (2015). Perioperative pulmonary aspiration is infrequent and low risk in
paediatric anaesthetic practice. Paediatr Anaesth, 25, 36– 43.
13 Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (2018). APA Consensus
statement on updated fluid fasting guidelines. M https:// www.apagbi.org.uk/ news/
apa- consensus- statement- updated- fluid- fasting- guidelines
14 Thomas M, Morrison C, Newton r, et al. (2018). Consensus statement on clear fluids fasting for
elective pediatric general anesthesia. Pediatr Anesth, 28, 411– 14.
15 The royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne. Sedative premedication guidelines. M https:// www.rch.
org.au/ uploadedfiles/ main/ content/ anaes/ sedative_ premedication_ guidelines.pdf
16 Gaynor J, Ansermino JM (2016). Paediatric total intravenous anaesthesia. BJA Educ, 16, 369– 73.
17 Schindler E, Schears GJ, Hall rS, et al. (2012). Ultrasound for vascular access in paediatric pa-
tients. Pediatr Anesth, 22, 1002– 7.
18 Krishna SG, Bryant JF, Tobias JD (2018). Management of the difficult paediatric airway in the
pediatric patient. J Pediatr Intensive Care, 7, 115– 25.
19 Humphries S, Schiber A (2020). Nasal high flow oxygen in pediatric anesthesia and airway man-
agement. Pediatr Anesth, 30, 339– 46.
20 Park r, Peyton JM, Fiadjoe JE, et al. (2017). The efficacy of GlideScope® videolaryngoscopy com-
pared with direct laryngoscopy in children who are difficult to intubate: an analysis from the
paediatric difficult intubation registry. Br J Anaesth, 119, 984– 92.


## 頁面 987

966 CHAPTEr 36 Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia
21 Difficult Airway Society (2012). Paediatric difficult airway guidelines. M https:// das.uk.com/ guide-
lines/ paediatric- difficult- airway- guidelines
22 Martin S, Baines D, Holtby H, et al., on behalf of The Association of Paediatric Anaesthetists
of Great Britain and Ireland (2016). Guidelines on the prevention of post- operative vomiting in chil-
dren. M https:// www.apagbi.org.uk/ sites/ default/ files/ inline- files/ 2016%20APA%20POV%20
Guideline- 2.pdf
23 Vittinghoff M, Lonnqvist P- A, Mossetti V, et al. (2018). Postoperative pain management in chil-
dren: guidance from the pain committee of the European Society for Paediatric Anaesthesiology
(ESPA Pain Management Ladder Initiative). Pediatr Anesth, 18, 1– 14.
24 Wiegele M, Marhofer P, Lonnqvist P-E (2019). Caudal epidural blocks in paediatric patients: a
review and practical considerations. Br J Anaesth, 122, 509– 17.
25 Bowling T, for SSrAUSA.com (2013). Ultrasound guided pediatric caudal block. M https://
www.youtube.com/ watch?v=WyqoaJFFOFs
26 royal College of Anaesthetists (2009). NAP3. The 3rd National Audit Project of The Royal College
of Anaesthetists. Major complications of central neuraxial block in the United Kingdom. M https://
www.rcoa.ac.uk/ sites/ default/ files/ documents/ 2019- 09/ NAP3%20report.pdf
27 New York School of regional Anesthesia (NYSOrA). Peripheral nerve blocks for children. M
https:// www.nysora.com/ foundations- of- regional- anesthesia/ sub- specialties/ pediatric-
anesthesia/ peripheral- nerve- blocks- children/
28 Choumanovai I, Sanusiii A, Evans F (2017). Anaesthetic management of tracheo-o esophageal fis-
tula/ oesophageal atresia. Anaesthesia Tutorial of the Week 364.
29 Zielinska M, Bartkowska-S niatkowska A, Becke K, et al. (2019). Safe paediatric procedural sed-
ation and analgesia by anaesthesiologists for elective procedures: a clinical practice statement
from the European Society of Paediatric Anaesthesiology. Pediatr Anesth, 29, 583– 90.
30 Neilsen N, Wettersley J, Cronberg T (2013). Targeted temperature management at 33*C versus
36*C after cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med, 369, 2197– 206.
31 resuscitation Council (UK) (2015). Guidelines: Paediatric advanced life support. M https:// www.
resus.org.uk/ library/ 2015- resuscitation- guidelines/ paediatric- advanced- life- support

