# 創傷麻醉

## Chapter 37: The major trauma patient

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 988-1053*

---


## 頁面 988

Chapter 37 967
The major trauma patient
Oliver Dodd and Alex Wickham
The patient journey 968
Oliver Dodd
Primary survey and resuscitation 971
Alex Wickham
Damage control resuscitation 982
Pregnancy and trauma 988
Oliver Dodd and Alex Wickham
Head and traumatic brain injury 989
Thoracic injury 995
Abdominal and pelvic injuries 999
Spinal trauma 1002
Limb and extremity injuries 1004
Gunshot, blast and crush injuries 1006
Traumatic cardiac arrest 1009
Edwin Clitheroe
Burns: early management 1013
Fleur Cantle
Major trauma in children 1019
Nicholas Freeman
Silver trauma 1025
See also
% Massive transfusion p. 460–1


## 頁面 989

968
968 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
The patient journey
Trauma
Trauma is injury caused when physical energy is transferred to the body
from an outside force. Kinetic energy may be blunt or sharp in nature.
Other mechanisms include pressure (blast injuries) and thermal (hot/c old/
electrical/ chemical burns).
Penetrating injuries result from an object entering the body (and some-
times exiting the body), causing damage along the path. They can be classi-
fied as low velocity (knife/s tabbing) or high velocity (gunshot wound). The
range of injury is vast and depends on what instrument is used, how much
force is applied and in which direction and which body cavity/ organ/ tissue
is penetrated.
Blunt trauma are injuries that occur when an object does not enter the
body. It may be caused by an impact (road traffic collision, fall from height,
crush) or assault. It produces a spectrum of effects from minor, single-
system to life-t hreatening, multisystem injuries. Typically, these include con-
tusions, abrasions, lacerations, tearing (shear forces) and fractures to the
affected body parts. The degree of damage depends on the mass and speed
of the moving object.
The major trauma system
Severely injured patients who are treated in a major trauma centre (MTC)
have better outcomes than those treated in smaller trauma units. Since 2010
in London, and 2012 in the rest of the UK, trauma networks have been set
up whereby ambulances and prehospital services can bypass smaller trauma
units to take trauma patients directly to an MTC.1
The MTC provides specialists in the management of major trauma and
ensures critically injured patients are treated by the right people in the right
place in the right time frame. Paediatric MTCs offer specialist treatment for
patients below 16y old.
Prehospital care
The patient journey begins at the point of injury. Prehospital services have
adapted and grown over time to improve patient management and out-
come prior to arrival at the MTC. Prehospital emergency anaesthesia for
intubation, blood administration and resuscitative thoracotomy are among
the procedures that can now be provided in the field by appropriately
trained prehospital clinicians. These teams are supported by specialist
ground and air ambulance services which transport these patients to the
most appropriate centre.
Advance warning and concise communication using an ATMIST2,3 pre-
alert to the eD will allow the team to prepare (Box 37.1). This ensures
essential resuscitation drugs, blood, staff and equipment are available be-
fore the patient’s arrival. Code words given by the prehospital team allow
organisational systems to be activated, e.g. blood products to be present
on arrival, specialist surgical teams pre- alerted and theatres to be made
immediately available.


## 頁面 990

THe PATIenT jOUrney 969
Box 37.1 ATMIST pre- alert communication tool
• Age and name
• Time of incident
• Mechanism of injury
• Injuries top to toe
• Vital Signs (initial and significant changes)
• Treatment.
Also include estimated time of arrival, mode of transport and specialist
resources required to be standing by.
Arrival in the resus room
Trauma teams
resuscitation of the major trauma patient is most effective when under-
taken by a team of specifically trained doctors and nurses with the leader-
ship of a trauma team leader (TTL). Allocated roles include: TTL, 1° survey
doctor, nurse, scribe, runner and blood monitor (if transfusion anticipated).
Team members work in parallel to simultaneously perform assessment, in-
vestigations, procedures and treatments under the direction of the TTL.
As an anaesthetist presenting to the eD prior to arrival of the patient, it is
important to identify and introduce yourself (name and grade) to the TTL.
The TTL will brief the team using ATMIST and allocate roles. As the anaes-
thetist, you are likely to be allocated airway management and neurological
assessment. Check your equipment; draw up medications if appropriate
and prepare for arrival of the patient.
Handover
Critical information from the prehospital phase of the patient journey must
be handed over to the trauma team on arrival. Prior to handover, a rapid
assessment is made by the TTL to ensure the patient has:
• A patent airway
• A pulse
• no uncontrolled, external, catastrophic haemorrhage.
This rapid assessment should take <10s and, once complete, is verbalised
to the team. Alternatively, the TTL can ask the prehospital team if they
have any immediate concerns. Only once the TTL is satisfied no immediate
action needs to be taken, can patient handover start.4 Handover should be
concise and completed within a minute. Avoid distractions, such as placing
monitoring, during this time to ensure you pay attention to the handover.
The team can then commence the next phase of the management.
Resuscitation room management
Traditional teaching by the well-k nown Advanced Trauma Life Support®
(ATLS®)5 framework considers the initial management in four phases:
• 1° survey
• resuscitation
• 2° survey
• Definitive care.


## 頁面 991

970
970 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
The first two phases are carried out simultaneously, during which there is
multidisciplinary discussion and planning for the next steps of patient care,
e.g. theatre, CT, ICU or ward. The 2° survey (see % p. 980) is not started
until the patient has been adequately resuscitated and stabilised. Clear
documentation should be made of each stage of the process: examination
findings, investigations and treatment, including medications and transfu-
sion. Interruptions in care for investigations and handover between teams
(e.g. eD to theatre) are common, and outstanding tasks must be recorded
(e.g. 2° survey not complete) so they are not forgotten. As the anaesthetist,
you may accompany the patient from the eD, via imaging, to theatre and
onwards to the ICU, so you are uniquely placed to provide continuity of
care, ensuring that tasks are completed and details retained.


## 頁面 992

PrIMAry SUrVey AnD reSUSCITATIOn 971
Primary survey and resuscitation
• During the 1° survey, the TTL should have a hands- off approach,
standing at the foot of the bed directing the team, while simultaneously
maintaining an overview and good situational awareness. Closed
loop questions and clear objectives from the TTL allow for a smooth
transition through the phase of immediate management.
• The principles of the 1° survey are to identify and resolve life-
threatening injuries in order of priority (Table 37.1).
Table 37.1 Principles of the primary survey and resuscitation
C Catastrophic haemorrhage Control via direct pressure and tourniquet
control
A Airway with C-s pine Maintain airway patency and control the
control C- spine
B Breathing Identify and treat chest injuries to ensure
oxygenation and ventilation
C Circulation Identify causes of shock and treat
appropriately
D Disability Perform a rapid assessment of neurological
function
E Exposure ensure full exposure of the patient while
preventing hypothermia
Management of catastrophic haemorrhage
• Life- threatening bleeding will lead to exsanguination and death unless
prompt treatment is instigated. Sequential management involves use
of elevation, direct pressure, indirect pressure to a proximal artery,
trauma pressure dressings, topical haemostatic agents (e.g. Celox™) and
tourniquets.
• H If the trauma patient is >20w pregnant, aortocaval compression
from the gravid uterus will exacerbate hypotension. A left lateral tilt or
manual left displacement of the gravid uterus should be instituted as
early as possible and maintained throughout resuscitation to optimise
preload. Consider the possibility of pregnancy in any ♀ trauma patient
of childbearing age. (See also % pp. 460–1.)
Airway with cervical spine control
• The priority during resuscitation of any severely injured patient is to
ensure a patent airway and maintain oxygenation. In doing so, strategies
to avoid exacerbating any C-s pine injury must be employed.
• Assume the presence of a spinal injury in any patient who has sustained
significant blunt trauma, until clearance procedures have been
completed.


## 頁面 993

972
972 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• exclusion of C-s pine injury must be undertaken by an experienced
clinician after clinical examination and imaging have been completed. A
reliable clinical examination cannot be obtained if the patient:
• Has sustained a significant closed head injury
• Is intoxicated
• Has a reduced conscious level from any other cause
• Has significant pain from an injury, which ‘distracts’ attention from
the neck.6
• Practical considerations need to be taken into account when applying a
rigid collar and blocks, especially to agitated patients or elderly patients
who may have pre- existing spinal conditions.
• jaw thrust is the preferred technique to open an airway in trauma
patients, as it minimises movement of the C- spine.
• The use of direct visual suction (taking care not to stimulate vomiting
in the obtunded patient) and adjuncts such as an oropharyngeal
airway can be used.
• Avoid instrumenting the nasopharynx in head injury patients due
to the possibility of base of skull fractures allowing access to the
cranium. H nasopharyngeal airways and nGTs should be used with
extreme caution.
• In the spontaneously breathing patient, O is delivered with a
2
reservoir (non- rebreathing) mask which delivers FiO 8 0.85.
2
• A non- exhaustive list of indications for intubation are listed in Box 37.2.
Prior to intubation, it is extremely important to document a precise
GCS and pupil assessment.
Induction of anaesthesia and intubation of the major trauma patient
(See % p. 388.)
• Teamwork is key to 1st- time success. There needs to be clear
communication between the TTL and the clinician performing the
intubation.
• Prepare: prepare and check all drugs and equipment. refamiliarise
yourself with the equipment available (e.g. VLs or emergency
cricothyroidotomy equipment).
Box 37.2 Indications for endotracheal intubation
• Airway obstruction unrelieved by basic airway manoeuvres
• Impending airway obstruction (e.g. inhalational injury and burns)
• Airway compromise (e.g. soiling from maxillofacial injuries)
• respiratory failure: consider intubation for head-i njured patients to
maintain normocapnia and PaO ≥8kPa
2
• Damage control or resuscitative surgery
• expedient intubation for analgesic/h umanitarian reasons
• Combative/ uncooperative patient, compromising further
investigation or treatment
• reduced or rapidly reducing GCS or loss of laryngeal reflexes.
Historically GCS ≤8; however, patients with a higher GCS may still
require intubation


## 頁面 994

PrIMAry SUrVey AnD reSUSCITATIOn 973
• Allocate clear roles: 1st intubator, 2nd intubator (if available), airway
assistant, drug administrator, cricoid pressure, MILS of the C-s pine.
• Vocalise the airway plan and strategy for failed intubation. An intubation
checklist should be used.
• MILS of the C-s pine: unless the trauma is an isolated penetrating injury,
full MILS C-s pine immobilisation should be used during intubation. MILS
can be maintained from the side (ideal as the team member then does
not interfere with the intubator) or head- end of the patient. It should
be instituted prior to removal of the collar or blocks and continues
until they are replaced at the end of intubation. Traction must not be
applied.
• Preoxygenate: consider augmenting Mapleson C/ circle circuit high
FiO and 5cmHO PeeP with nasal O cannulae at 15L/ min placed
2 2 2
pre- intubation if SpO <90%. If the patient’s ventilatory effort is
2
inadequate, gentle assisted ventilation, avoiding inflating the stomach,
can be used.
• Cricoid pressure, if used, should be two- handed (anterior and
posterior) to prevent displacement of any C- spine injuries.
• Induce anaesthesia. All induction drugs have the potential to cause
vasodilation and compound hypotension.
• Ketamine, fentanyl and rocuronium have become the drug
combination of choice in major trauma, for both prehospital and in-
hospital emergency use. The dose regimens should be sensitive to the
patient’s physiology.
• For the trauma patient without physiological compromise: 3
micrograms/ kg fentanyl, 2mg/ kg ketamine and 1mg/ kg rocuronium is
appropriate (a ‘3- 2- 1 induction’).
• For physiologically unstable patients, reduce the doses to 1
microgram/ kg fentanyl, 1mg/ kg ketamine and 1mg/k g rocuronium (a
‘1- 1- 1- induction’).
• If the patient is critically unwell, ketamine in reduced doses and
rocuronium alone may be used.
• Alternative agents: thiopental can be used for normotensive head
injuries. Suxamethonium 1.5mg/ kg can be used in the immediate
aftermath of trauma, even in patients with burns or spinal injury;
however, in patients with severe muscle injury or if there is a
suspicion of raised K+ from other causes, it should be avoided.
• Blood/ fluid should be connected to a large- bore cannula and volume
given to compensate for the effects of anaesthesia.
• Laryngoscopy:
• Anticipate difficult laryngoscopy. Full C-s pine immobilisation with
collar, blocks and tape limits neck movement to 5% of the normal
range, resulting in Cormack and Lehane grade III or IV views in 64%
of patients. removing the anterior portion of the hard collar and
using assistant-p rovided MILS makes it easier, but 22% of patients will
still have grade III views at laryngoscopy.7
• VLs with hyperangulated blades are the preferred method for
intubation to reduce movement of the atlanto- occipital and
atlantoaxial joints.


## 頁面 995

974
974 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• If there is airway or maxillofacial trauma, direct laryngoscopy is ideal
as a small amount of blood on a VL camera will rapidly obscure any
view. A size 4 Macintosh blade with a short handle is suitable.
• Some advocate use of bougie on 1st attempt.
• If intubation is impossible, an SGA will provide a temporary airway
but may not prevent aspiration. refer to Fig. 15.4 (see % p. 369) for
DAS algorithm.
• ETT. A large, cuffed single- lumen eTT should be used. Confirm eTT
placement with eTCO (preferably waveform). This needs to be
2
verbalised clearly to the TTL.
Breathing problems and thoracic trauma
The aim is to identify and correct the immediately life-t hreatening condi-
tions which can follow blunt or penetrating thoracic trauma:
• Tension pneumothorax
• Open pneumothorax
• Massive haemothorax
• Flail chest
• Airway disruption/ obstruction
• Cardiac tamponade.
Other non- life- threatening conditions will be discussed later in the chapter.
• A systematic approach, including inspection, palpation, percussion
and auscultation, paying specific attention to the axillae, neck, upper
abdomen and back will help to identify these pathologies.
• early use of thoracic ultrasound as part of the extended focused
assessment with sonography for trauma (eFAST) will pick up cardiac
tamponade or massive haemothorax and is more sensitive in picking up
pneumothorax than CXr in the supine patient. It can also give a crude,
but useful appreciation of fluid status by looking at the IVC.
Tension pneumothorax
• Suspect if: thoracic trauma, hypotension, tachycardia and respiratory
distress.
• Signs: reduced air entry and chest wall movement on the affected
side with resonant percussion note. Tracheal deviation is a late and
inconsistent finding.
• Treatment: decompression by lateral thoracostomy in the 4th or 5th
intercostal space (in pregnant patients, the 4th intercostal space is
preferred), anterior to the mid- axillary line. This is followed by chest
tube insertion. Following thoracostomy, an audible rush of air may be
heard and accompany prompt improvement in physiology.
• needle decompression in the 2nd intercostal space, mid-c lavicular line,
should be considered a technique of last resort if no one is available to
perform tube thoracostomy.
Open pneumothorax
An open pneumothorax should be treated by covering the exterior wound
with a non- occlusive, one-w ay valve dressing, such as an Asherman Chest
Seal™, followed by a chest drain inserted at a separate site on the same side
of the chest.


## 頁面 996

PrIMAry SUrVey AnD reSUSCITATIOn 975
Massive haemothorax
• Defined as 1000– 1500mL of blood in the thoracic cavity in an adult. It
causes both hypovolaemia and impaired ventilation.
• It usually occurs 2° to a laceration of the intercostal artery or vein and
less commonly from a mediastinal vessel.
• Signs: reduced chest wall movement and stony dull percussion can be
supported by thoracic ultrasound which reveals a large collection of
blood above the diaphragm.
• Immediate treatment includes:
• High- flow O
2
• Large- bore IV access × 2
• Chest drain insertion
• Blood product resuscitation via a rapid infusor device (see % p. 460).
Start the transfusion as the haemothorax is released.
• Caution is needed with chest drain insertion as this procedure may
dislodge a clot and cause further active bleeding.
• Ongoing drainage of blood from the intercostal drain of 100–2 00mL/ h
over the subsequent hours will indicate the need for thoracotomy or
interventional radiology.
Flail chest
• A flail segment occurs when two or more adjacent ribs are fractured in
two or more places.
• Patients will present with pain and, if conscious, shallow and painful
respiration.
• Signs: paradoxical movement of the chest wall may not always be
present (some flails are only seen radiologically), but there will
be tenderness, bruising, crepitus and underlying lung contusion ±
pneumothorax.
• The principles of treatment are as per pulmonary contusion (see
% pp. 995–6.
• rib fixation within 3–5 d of injury has demonstrated shorter length of
hospital stay and better analgesic outcomes.8
Airway disruption
• Patients with major airway disruption will often asphyxiate at the scene.
Survivors may present with severe surgical emphysema, pneumothorax,
haemothorax, pneumomediastinum, pneumopericardium and
pneumoperitoneum. These injuries are often the consequence of high-
energy transfer and shear forces.
• Diagnosis is often made by the anaesthetist when trying to manage
blood in the airway, difficult intubation and, once intubated, a major
air leak.
• Fibreoptic bronchoscopy or, if stable enough, CT are diagnostic.
• Depending on the level of disruption, management may be surgical or,
for some small bronchopleural fistulae, conservative.


## 頁面 997

976
976 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Cardiac tamponade
• Cardiac tamponade should be considered in any trauma patient who
has sustained a penetrating injury to the chest, neck or upper abdomen.
Cardiac tamponade can also occur in blunt trauma, especially in patients
taking oral anticoagulants, but this is rare.
• Beck’s triad (hypotension, distended neck veins and muffled heart
sounds) is unreliable, especially in a noisy eD. Thoracic ultrasound will
demonstrate diastolic rV collapse and blood in the pericardial space.
This is diagnostic of cardiac tamponade.
• The initial management of cardiac tamponade involves improving
preload through volume resuscitation (blood products), while the TTL
arranges definitive surgical intervention.
• If the patient deteriorates in the eD despite this, a resuscitative bilateral
anterior (‘clamshell’) thoracotomy and pericardiotomy with repair of
the myocardium should be undertaken (see % pp. 1010–11).
Circulation and shock
During the 1° survey, always suspect and actively look for haemorrhage
and shock. Place pregnant patients in the left lateral position or manually
displace the uterus to the left. Shock is defined as inadequate delivery of
oxygenated blood to tissues. Causes are shown in Table 37.2.
• Suspicion of circulatory compromise may come from the pre-a lert and
mechanism of injury, while recognition of shock should begin at the
rapid assessment and handover.
• The TTL will coordinate simultaneous:
• Circulatory assessment and identification of hypovolaemia
• Haemostasis
• Treatment of haemorrhage.
• During the 1° survey, Hr, BP, rr, capillary refill time, conscious level
and pallor may help to identify patients with shock.
• Traditional ATLS® teaching classifies shock into grades I– IV; however,
this has been widely scrutinised, with fewer than half of european
ATLS® instructors declaring they would use this tool.9 Certain drugs,
being cold and some pre- existing medical conditions may lead to
overestimation of blood loss, while the tool underestimates blood loss
in children, pregnancy, blunt trauma and athletes.9
• A shock index (Hr/ systolic BP) of >1 can help identify shock in patients
with apparently relatively normal physiology.10
Table 37.2 Shock
Type of shock Example causes
Hypovolaemic Haemorrhage, burns, interstitial losses, dehydration
Cardiogenic 1° myocardial event, including injury and ischaemia
Obstructive Cardiac tamponade, tension pneumothorax, massive Pe
Distributive neurogenic, usually caused by a spinal injury above T6
Septic, due to systemic inflammatory response
Anaphylactic, type 1 hypersensitivity reaction


## 頁面 998

PrIMAry SUrVey AnD reSUSCITATIOn 977
• Bedside use of ultrasound may help identify the presence of blood and/o r
the cause of shock (e.g. pericardial fluid, an empty IVC, blood in the
abdomen or chest).
• Control of haemorrhage begins with direct pressure, indirect pressure,
tourniquets, pelvic and long bone splints.
• Large- bore IV (14 or 16G), IO or central access is attained in major
trauma patients as early as possible.
• Send blood samples for: venous blood gas (lactate), FBC, G&S or X-
match, electrolytes, coagulation profile (TeG® or rOTeM® if available).
POCT can be extremely useful.
• If significant bleeding is suspected or evident, tranexamic acid is
given within 3h of injury (1g over 10min), if not already given by the
prehospital team, followed by 1g over 8h.
• If the patient is known to be on anticoagulants with ongoing bleeding,
use of factor concentrates or reversal agents may be indicated.
• Major trauma patients are at risk of the ‘lethal triad’ of acidosis,
coagulopathy and hypothermia. Pay attention to keeping the patient
warm— measure temperature, limit exposure to that which is required
for assessment/ procedures and use active warming and warmed blood
products.
Resuscitation goals
• The goals of resuscitation are to optimise tissue oxygenation (Box
37.3).11,12 Acute shocked trauma patients are in a dynamic situation and
should be reassessed regularly.
• Patients with haemorrhagic shock will respond in one of three ways to
blood product administration:
• Improve
• Transiently improve, then deteriorate, requiring further fluid
resuscitation
• not improve.
• Practically, until major bleeding has been stopped, volume resuscitation
should be titrated to maintain palpable central pulses,8 systolic BP
of 80– 90mmHg, MAP of 50– 60mmHg3 and diastolic pressures of
25– 35mmHg (to achieve coronary perfusion).1 Conscious level is a
good indicator of cerebral perfusion in awake patients. young, healthy
patients may tolerate a lower BP, while elderly patients may need
a higher BP— this is up to the clinical judgement of an experienced
anaesthetist/ TTL on an individual basis13 (see % p. 1026).
(See % p. 1020 for paediatric parameters.)
• In the complex patient with traumatic brain or spinal cord injuries
and ongoing haemorrhage, the BP target depends on the dominant
condition. If haemorrhagic shock is the predominant problem,
restrictive volume resuscitation should be employed. If traumatic brain
injury is the predominant issue, a less restrictive approach, targeting SBP
of 100– 110mmHg and MAP of ≥80mmHg, should be used to maintain
cerebral perfusion prior to surgery.3,11,14,15
• Patients who do not have a sustained improvement require further
blood product resuscitation and definitive management of their
haemorrhage. This can be achieved by surgery (see % pp. 982–3) or
interventional radiology (see % p. 824) with ongoing correction of
coagulopathy.


## 頁面 999

978
978 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• If the source of bleeding is unknown, the TTL, in conjunction with the
trauma/ general surgeon, must decide if the patient will go straight to
theatre or undergo CT first. This will depend on the stability of the
patient, but unless lifesaving surgery is required immediately, patients
generally benefit from CT scans.16
• Deterioration in the resuscitation room despite fluid resuscitation may
lead to traumatic cardiac arrest (see % pp. 1009–11).
Box 37.3 Goals of resuscitation
• Systolic BP 80– 100mmHg (head- injured patient: MAP >80mmHg)
(see caveats above)
• Hr <120bpm
• SpO >95%
2
• Hb 70– 100g/ L
• Inr <1.6
• Lactate <4mmol/ L
• Base excess > – 6
• Fibrinogen >1.5g/ L
• Platelets >50 × 109/ L (aim for >75 × 109/ L)
• pH >7.2
• Core temperature >35.0°C
• Ionised calcium >1.1mmol/ L
Source: data from Patient Blood Management Guidelines: Module 1 Critical Bleeding Massive
Transfusion (2009) national Blood Authority Australia Updated 2011.
Fluid administration in major trauma
• The use of crystalloid in traumatic haemorrhage is limited to prehospital
teams that do not carry blood and patients who will not receive blood
products (e.g. jehovah’s Witnesses).3
• For full guidance on haemostatic resuscitation, see % pp. 983–4.
• Initial balanced resuscitation, using warmed PrBCs/F FP/ platelets in a
1:1:1 ratio, is recommended.17
• In the UK, all hospitals should have a massive transfusion protocol
(MTP), which can be initiated based on local thresholds, for significant
haemorrhage. The MTP alerts the transfusion laboratory of a major
haemorrhage and guarantees the delivery of certain blood products,
which may vary between hospitals. Typically, there is an initial pack
containing PrBCs and FFP and a 2nd pack that includes PrBCs, FFP,
cryoprecipitate (or fibrinogen concentrate) and platelets.
• See Box 37.4 for initial dosage of blood products.18 Further
administration is guided by laboratory testing or POCT, e.g. ABG and
TeG® or rOTeM®.
• Consider calcium chloride after 2– 4 units of blood.
Disability
• Assess pupils for size, equality and reactivity to light.
• A relative afferent pupillary defect with facial trauma may alert the team
to a retro-o rbital haematoma which needs immediate decompression
with lateral canthectomy.


## 頁面 1000

PrIMAry SUrVey AnD reSUSCITATIOn 979
• Formal assessment of GCS (see % Table 37.4, p. 990) and gross motor
function bilaterally will alert the TTL to major spinal and intracranial
injuries. This needs to be accomplished prior to intubation.
• If not already administered, tranexamic acid should be given in isolated
head- injured patients with reduced GCS (9–1 2) prior to CT brain if
within 3h of the injury.19
• ensure that blood glucose level and analgesia have been addressed by
this point.
Box 37.4 Initial dosage of blood products
Hb <70g/ L rate of administration guided by rate of
blood loss. Aim for 70– 90g/ L (>80g/ L if
cardiac history)
Inr >1.5 Give FFP 15– 20mL/ kg
Fibrinogen <1.0g/ L Give two packs (2 × 5 unit pools)
Platelets <50 × 109/ L Give one adult therapeutic dose
Source: data from Hunt B et al. (2015) A practical guideline for the haematological management
of major haemorrhage British J Haematology 170(6), 788– 803.
Exposure
• It is important to expose the patient completely and inspect the axillae,
back and groin for penetrating injuries (a ‘stab check’), while making
attempts to avoid hypothermia.
• Often a log roll is not performed prior to a trauma CT (if indicated),
but the TTL should have an appreciation of all major obvious wounds.
Imaging
(See % Table 37.3 and Box 37.5.)
• Imaging should aid in decision- making and the early planning phase of
the patient journey, as well as provide diagnoses.
• X-r ays of the chest and pelvis may be performed as part of the 1° survey.
• Ultrasound can be performed quickly in the eD to identify free fluid
(blood) in the perihepatic and perisplenic regions indicating abdominal
haemorrhage. eFAST is a structured assessment looking for:
• Blood in the perihepatic, perisplenic, pericardial and pelvic areas
• Air (pneumothoraces) via anterior thoracic windows.
• Ultrasound can be used to identify blood in the abdomen but should
not be used to rule out the presence of blood, as there is significant
operator dependency and, even in experienced hands, retroperitoneal
and small volumes of blood can be missed.20 even if no fluid is identified,
this does not rule out other abdominal injuries which may require
surgical intervention.


## 頁面 1001

980
980 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• eFAST has become controversial in some units where expedient trauma
CT is preferred as the initial investigation of choice.
• A trauma CT (see % p. 819) images the head, neck, chest, abdomen
and pelvis. It is often prioritised after the 1° survey in adults. The aim is
to gain as much information of the injuries as quickly as possible. The
injection of contrast allows for greater diagnostic information. The
Camp Bastion Protocol for trauma CT is commonly used. (See %
pp. 1022–3 for guidance in paediatric patients.)
• The Primary Assessment report21 is a method by which the radiologist
can rapidly provide information that will change immediate management
and disposition of the patient. A formal report will be issued
subsequently when the radiologist has fully reviewed the films.
Table 37.3 Imaging
Ultrasound CT scan
Indication Screening for free fluid in unstable Diagnosis of organ injury
patients in haemodynamically stable
patients
Advantages Fast, sensitivity 83– 87%, can Most specific for injury (92–
detect free fluid and some solid 98%), will also demonstrate
organ injury perforation
Dis- Operator- dependent; misses Takes time and involves
advantages diaphragm, bowel and some transfer away from resus
pancreatic injuries room
May delay CT
Log roll
If the patient is stable, a log roll may be appropriate prior to moving on to
the 2° survey. The purpose of the log roll is to ensure the back has been
visualised and if a full trauma scan has not been done, the TTL will assess
the spine for tenderness and sensation.
The secondary survey
The 2° survey requires a systematic head- to- toe examination of the patient.
It will also include management of peripheral injuries, an eCG, complete
neurological examination and, if required, a formal orthopaedic review, a
urinary catheter and American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) chart com-
pletion. The 2° survey often occurs outside the eD in major trauma, after
resuscitation, surgery or transfer to critical care, and formal documentation
of this step, when it occurs, is important.


## 頁面 1002

PrIMAry SUrVey AnD reSUSCITATIOn 981
Box 37.5 Summary of NICE guidance on imaging in
major trauma3
• Patients with suspected chest trauma or suspected haemorrhage:
perform imaging urgently; images should be interpreted immediately
by a health care professional with training and skills in this area.
• Patients with suspected haemorrhage and haemodynamic instability
who are not responding to volume resuscitation: limit diagnostic
imaging (CXr and pelvis X- ray or FAST) to the minimum needed to
direct intervention.
• Patients with suspected haemorrhage who are responding to
resuscitation or have normal haemodynamic status: consider
immediate CT.
• Use whole- body CT in adults (≥16y) with blunt major trauma and
suspected multiple injuries.
• FAST in major trauma patients:
• Do not use FAST or other diagnostic imaging before immediate CT
or as a screening modality to determine the need for CT.
• A negative FAST does not exclude intraperitoneal or
retroperitoneal haemorrhage.
FAST, focused assessment with sonography for trauma.
Source: data from national Institute for Health and Care excellence (2016) Major trauma: as-
sessment and initial management nICe guideline 39 M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng39


## 頁面 1003

982
982 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Damage control resuscitation
(See also % pp. 460–1.)
Overview
• Haemorrhage is the leading cause of preventable death in the first 24h
after trauma, accounting for 50% of deaths.15
• Damage control resuscitation (DCr) is a treatment strategy that aims to
preserve life in bleeding trauma patients by stopping haemorrhage and
proactively countering the ‘lethal triad’ of hypothermia, acidaemia and
coagulopathy.22
• The key elements of DCr include:
• Haemorrhage control and restoration of perfusion via damage
control surgery (DCS)
• Haemostatic resuscitation to prevent and treat trauma-i nduced
coagulopathy (TIC)
• Permissive hypotension.
• DCr consists of four phases:
• Phase 0: recognition, rapid transport to hospital/t heatre and start of
resuscitation
• Phase 1: DCS and continued DCr
• Phase 2: ICU-b ased physiological and biochemical stabilisation
• Phase 3: return to theatre for definitive repair of injuries.
Damage control surgery
• DCS involves an abbreviated operation to control life-t hreatening
injuries and restore physiology, rather than correct anatomy. Initially
described by rotondo,23 the goal is to preserve life.
• DCS may be essential in non- trauma centres to stabilise a patient prior
to transfer to a tertiary centre.
• The decision to use DCS should be made early, but not lightly. Timely
selection of appropriate patients for DCS ensures maximal benefit;
the later DCS is applied, the less successful the outcome. Around 10%
of major trauma patients require DCS, but the risk of morbidity and
mortality is significantly higher and there are resource implications.22
If the patient has normal physiology or responds promptly to
resuscitation, then definitive repair should be attempted. Surgery should
be matched to the physiology— if a patient deteriorates during their
procedure, DCS should be utilised.
• There is no single threshold for DCS, rather a ‘global’ view should
be used to select patients. When the severity of surgical bleeding
exceeds the patient’s capacity to respond, DCS should be considered.
Indications of physiological exhaustion include:11,21,22
• Preselected, based on mechanism of injury, e.g. penetrating trauma or
high- energy blunt trauma
• Metabolic compromise: pH <7.25, base excess < – 6, lactate >2.5
• Massive transfusion, i.e. >10 units of PrBCs
• Coagulopathy on POCT/ lab results or clinical evidence
• Hypothermia <34.0– 35.0ºC.
• Once the need for DCS has been identified, the patient should be
rapidly transported to theatre. Investigations should only help identify
which body cavity to open—C Xr, pelvic X- ray and eFAST.


## 頁面 1004

DAMAGe COnTrOL reSUSCITATIOn 983
• Typical DCS procedures include resuscitative laparotomy, resuscitative
thoracotomy, pelvic packing, junctional surgery (i.e. neck/g roins/
axillae) and external fixation of fractures. More than 1 surgical team may
operate simultaneously.
• The patient should be positioned and the skin prepared to enable
extension of the initial incision into another body cavity or junctional
zone, e.g. in the crucifix position.
• DCS consists of four key principles:
• Haemorrhage control: using packs, vessel ligation, suturing, organ
excision (e.g. splenectomy, nephrectomy, linear resection of lung
tissue), shunts and haemostatic adjuncts
• Control contamination: debridement and removal of contaminants
followed by closure of bowel injuries— small injuries may be simply
sutured, while larger injuries should be stapled and the bowel ends
left discontinuous
• Protect the patient from further injury
• Temporary closure.
• DCS procedures should last <60– 90min. resuscitation and correction
of physiology should continue in ICU thereafter.
Haemostatic resuscitation
• Haemostatic resuscitation11,17,21,22,24 is the aggressive treatment of TIC.
• TIC is caused by multiple factors and is associated with i morbidity and
mortality:21
• Hypoperfusion, resulting from the injury itself, causes an endogenous
coagulopathy.
• Formation of clots leads to a consumptive coagulopathy.
• Hypothermia and acidaemia (together with TIC make the ‘lethal
triad’) exacerbate dysfunction further.
• Stored blood is physiologically imperfect, particularly so if >22d
old. even if you provide excellent resuscitation, you will be providing
resuscitation with fluid that has inferior clotting and O- carrying ability
2
to the patient’s own.
• Transfusion should follow the local major haemorrhage/massive
transfusion protocol. The major haemorrhage protocol should be
initiated to alert the transfusion laboratory and portering services, in
addition to clinical teams, that significant haemorrhage is expected.
Typical major haemorrhage protocol triggers include blood given by
prehospital services, at TTL discretion based on pre- alert information,
blood loss of ≥150mL/ min or actual/ anticipated blood loss of ≥30%
of circulating volume in 3h (71500mL). PrBCs and blood products are
often issued as emergency ‘packs’, which enable abbreviated ordering
of the products. The ‘packs’ are virtual and may not arrive together,
depending on what is immediately available.
• ‘Shock/ trauma packs’ often contain 4 PrBCs and 4 FFP (prethawed, if
possible). O+ blood can be given to ♂ patients. Further ‘packs’ may
contain similar products and quantities but also include cryoprecipitate
(or fibrinogen concentrate) and platelets.
• Initial transfusion ratios target the empirical optimum transfusion ratio
of 1:1:1 PrBCs to FFP to platelets, which was demonstrated to improve


## 頁面 1005

984
984 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
outcomes in the PrOPPr trial.17 A ‘pool of platelets’ contains 4–6 units,
so giving one pool every 4–6 PrBCs maintains the ratio balance.
• Use a rapid transfusor device to warm and deliver all blood products,
apart from platelets. The rate of transfusion should be guided by an
estimation of the deficit and the rate of ongoing blood loss.
• Tranexamic acid (1g or 15mg/ kg in children) should be given IV over
10min as soon as possible within the first 3h after injury to counter
hyperfibrinolysis. A 2nd dose of 1g should be infused over the next 8h.
• Calcium chloride 10%: give 10mL approximately every 4 units of
PrBCs, or if ionised calcium ≤1.0mmol/L , to treat hypocalcaemia from
consumption and citrate chelation.
• early and regular blood gas analysis and viscoelastic assays (TeG®/
rOTeM®) should be used, in addition to clinical information, to target
further transfusion to the individual patient’s need. Base excess, lactate,
pH, viscoelastic assay values and rate of ongoing blood loss guide the
resuscitation. In acute haemorrhage, Hb is unreliable, but targeting 70–
100g/ L and platelets >50 × 109/ L is recommended.11,18 H Do not wait
until Hb has dropped to these values before starting transfusion, as you
will struggle to catch up.
• Switch to type- specific or X-m atched blood at the earliest opportunity.
• replace fibrinogen. Target TeG®/ rOTeM® values or Clauss fibrinogen
levels (>2g/ L preferably, and at least >1.5g/ L). Two pools of
cryoprecipitate will provide 71g of fibrinogen. Up to 3– 4g may be
needed initially. Alternatively, use fibrinogen concentrate, which does
not need to be thawed.
• Correct hyperkalaemia: 50mL of 50% glucose and 15 units of insulin
infusion over 20– 30min to maintain K+ 3.5– 4.5mmol/ L.
• Crystalloid and colloid fluids should be avoided to prevent worsening
the dilutional coagulopathy, unless there is no other option. Small
volumes, e.g. 250mL boluses, should be used.
• Reverse anticoagulated patients: PCC, e.g. Octaplex®, or other
appropriate reversal agents.
• Further management: PCC, recombinant factor VIIa and warm whole
blood (if available) may be considered for resistant coagulopathy, in
conjunction with haematology advice.
Permissive hypotension
• Permissive hypotension is a temporarily tolerated passive process
until the bleeding is stopped definitively by surgery or interventional
radiology.21
• There is little high- quality evidence for permissive hypotension.
But studies have shown that attempting to normalise BP in active
haemorrhage with fluids or vasopressors is counterproductive, creating
a cycle of bleeding from i hydrostatic pressure followed by requirement
for further fluids/ vasopressors.21,25,26 However, there is ongoing debate
about the validity of this research, as most was conducted before
modern balanced transfusion and DCr- based approaches.
• Practically, until major bleeding has been stopped, volume resuscitation
should be titrated to maintain palpable central pulses,3 systolic BP
of 80– 90mmHg, MAP of 50– 60mmHg11 and diastolic pressures of
25– 35mmHg (to achieve coronary perfusion).21 Conscious level is a


## 頁面 1006

DAMAGe COnTrOL reSUSCITATIOn 985
good indicator of cerebral perfusion in awake patients. A lower BP in a
young, healthy patient who is cerebrating may be acceptable, but this is
up to the clinical judgement of an experienced anaesthetist/T TL on an
individual basis. elderly patients may need a higher systolic pressure (see
% p. 1026).
• In complex patients with both haemorrhagic shock and traumatic
brain injury (GCS ≤8)/s pinal cord injury, the BP targets depend on the
dominant condition. If haemorrhagic shock is the predominant problem,
restrictive volume resuscitation should be employed. If traumatic brain
injury is the predominant issue, a less restrictive approach, targeting
systolic BP of 100– 110mmHg and MAP of ≥80mmHg, should be used
to maintain cerebral perfusion.3,11,14,15
• Transient use of vasopressors, targeting the above values, can be
considered in life- threatening hypotension while volume replacement is
ongoing.11
• note, the above BP values are population-b ased rules of thumb. elderly
patients may need higher MAP and systolic BP.
• When haemorrhage is controlled, carefully resuscitate to more
normotensive BPs to optimise organ perfusion. The shorter the
period of permissive hypotension, the better for organ perfusion
and morbidity. The concept of ‘hybrid resuscitation’27 acknowledges
the need to reduce the period of hypotension, partially restoring
the BP after 1h, even if definitive haemostasis is not achieved. This
provides a greater degree of tissue perfusion prior to complete surgical
haemostasis.
Additional considerations
Vascular access
• Two 14–1 6G cannulae in a large peripheral vein.
• Large- bore central access 8.5Fr (PAFC introducer/ Arrow® MAC™) into
the subclavian or internal jugular vein. Avoid insertion distal to a source
of haemorrhage, i.e. avoid the femoral vein in abdominal trauma.
• resuscitation, theatre transfers and surgery should not be delayed for
central or arterial lines (there is no such thing as a ‘quick’ line!). Position
the patient to allow insertion once surgery has started, e.g. in the
crucifix position.
• Temporary vascular access can be achieved by IO cannulae in the
humeral heads, if necessary.
Hypothermia management
• Target a core temperature >36°C.
• Monitor temperature with an orally placed oesophageal
temperature probe.
• Warm all blood products/fl uids.
• Use both underbody and overbody forced air warming blankets and
cover other exposed areas with Gamgee/ blankets.
• Warm humidified breathing circuit.
Human factors
• Providing DCr for severely injured major trauma patients is challenging.
Diagnoses and multiple interventions need to occur simultaneously.
Senior clinicians should be present throughout.


## 頁面 1007

986
986 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• Clear communication, calm leadership, active followership and
situational awareness from team members are key.
• roles should be assigned, including: team and subteam leader(s), blood
and transfusion monitors and scribe.
• regular communication between surgical teams and anaesthetists is
recommended every 15– 20min during surgery. ‘SnAP- Chat’28 is a
mnemonic that aids covering:
• Surgical progress/ systolic BP
• Number of blood products
• ABG, coagulation and temperature
• Plan until next interval.
• A hot debrief when the patient has left theatre is extremely useful both
as a learning tool and to support staff wellbeing. Further debriefing and
support may be needed after on- table deaths, extreme injuries and
mass casualty events.
Damage control anaesthesia
(See % pp. 972–4.)
• Preoxygenation should start using 15L/ min via a non- rebreathing face
mask while en route to theatre if the patient is awake.
• In theatre, if inducing for lifesaving haemorrhage control surgery, the
patient should have their skin prepared and draped and the surgical
team ready to put knife to skin immediately after intubation.
• A primed rapid infusor should be connected to a large-b ore cannula
giving volume to compensate for anaesthesia and release of any
tamponade.
• DLTs are not recommended, even for thoracic cases, due to the
additional complexity (and lack of familiarity for most anaesthetists) in
an already difficult situation. A bronchial blocker can be used, or a single
lumen tube advanced endobronchially, if required.
• Ventilation: initially, limit intrathoracic pressure to avoid further
compromising a shocked circulation. Suggested starting parameters are
FiO 100%, rr 10 breaths/ min, V 5– 6mL/ kg and PeeP 0– 4cmHO,
2 T 2
aiming for oxygenation. As the circulating volume expands, minute
ventilation and PeeP can be i and FiO reduced to more normal levels.
2
• Maintenance of anaesthesia: volatile maintenance is recommended over
TIVA to avoid additional workload in changing syringes. Target a MAC
of 0.4– 0.6, with 50- microgram fentanyl boluses (2– 3mg total dose for
case) to provide simple, CVS- stable anaesthesia. Fentanyl provides a
degree of vasodilation to aid the replacement of lost circulating fluid
and lactate clearance. Larger doses can cause haemodynamic instability.
• Antibiotics: determined by local policy, dependent on the incision.
• Analgesia: fentanyl boluses as above. Further small doses of ketamine
and paracetamol may be used as appropriate. regional anaesthesia may
be considered but is often impractical.
• Constantly re- evaluate: when bleeding is controlled, slow down the
rate of blood product infusion to avoid fluid- overloading the patient.
• Intraoperative problems:
• Unexplained d BP and i Hr: consider hypovolaemia, pneumothorax,
pericardial tamponade or retroperitoneal vessel injury.
• Unexplained hypoxia and rise in inflation pressures: consider tension
pneumothorax.


## 頁面 1008

DAMAGe COnTrOL reSUSCITATIOn 987
• Unexplained i BP: consider pain, i ICP (search for associated
neurological signs), or rarely traumatic disruption of the thoracic
aorta (causing a pseudocoarctation effect).
Tips
• If pH <7.1, consider sodium bicarbonate.
• Transthoracic echocardiography can be useful to assess the fluid status
of the heart chambers for those trained in its use.
• Pass an OGT to empty the stomach prior to extubation if this is
intended.
• Although patients initially may be hypocoagulable, they often become
progressively hypercoagulable. Veno- thromboprophylaxis should be
instigated early when warranted.
Stages II and III: restoration of normality and
definitive repair
• The ICU team will aim to reverse the physiological and biochemical
effects of injury and hypotension. They will use invasive monitoring and
POCT to optimise blood flow, continue correction of coagulopathy and
rewarm the patient. A tertiary survey will occur and any further imaging
be undertaken (if the patient is ‘stable’ after surgery, a CT scan can be
completed en route to ICU).
• restoration of normal physiology may take up to 48h, though this
may occur quicker. Some patients may require an unplanned return to
theatre to manage further bleeding, a shunt occlusion or abdominal
compartment syndrome.
• Definitive surgical repair may require several trips to theatre,
particularly in the case of polytrauma patients. Procedures should be
performed 48– 72h after the initial surgery when the patient’s physiology
has been corrected; the patient should be normothermic and have
normal clotting and haemodynamics.
• Procedures should be planned such that appropriate specialist surgical
teams are prepared. It is possible, and more efficient, if surgical teams
from different specialties work simultaneously to achieve >1 procedure
per trip to theatre. However, major trauma patients at 48–7 2h post-
injury are still finely balanced physiologically and can still deteriorate if
surgery is prolonged. Plans should be in place for staging surgery.
• Be prepared for further blood loss and fluid losses. Invasive monitoring,
frequent POCT and correction with blood, fluids and inotropes are
appropriate.
• ALI: trauma patients are at high risk of hypoxia from ALI. This may
be 2° to direct pulmonary contusion or due to fat embolism from
orthopaedic injuries (see % p. 614). Lung- protective ventilation and
advanced ventilatory modes may be required to maintain appropriate
oxygenation.


## 頁面 1009

988
988 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Pregnancy and trauma
Trauma affects 7% of pregnancies,29 typically road traffic collisions, falls and
domestic violence. Standard assessment and management principles should
be followed as optimal resuscitation of the mother also benefits the fetus.30
Considerations in the pregnant woman
• The anatomical and physiological changes of pregnancy (see %
pp. 838–9) mean injury patterns may differ, depending on the stage of
pregnancy, and the woman’s response can be altered.29,30,31
• After 12w gestation, the uterus expands out of the pelvis and displaces
intra- abdominal organs which may be relatively protected.
• Later in pregnancy, the raised diaphragm means ‘chest trauma’ could
also involve abdominal structures.
• Injuries to the uterus can lead to placental abruption, preterm labour
(most commonly), premature rupture of membranes and uterine
rupture.
• Blunt trauma is more likely to cause placental abruption, while
penetrating abdominal trauma is more likely to involve the uterus itself
(which provides some protection to abdominal viscera). The gravid
uterus can complicate laparotomy (see % p. 893).
• Pregnant women have a larger circulating blood volume and
compensate for bleeding well; fetal distress (on cardiotocography) may
be the 1st sign of physiological instability.
Adaptations to the initial assessment and management
• Visibly pregnant women (typically >20w gestation) should be placed in a
20° left lateral tilt or the uterus displaced.
• Perform a pelvic examination; take an obstetric history, and obtain a
cardiotocography trace.
• X- rays and CT scans should not be withheld if indicated, but shield the
fetus where possible.
• Additional teams who should attend, in addition to the standard trauma
team, include obstetrics/ midwifery and neonatal.
• ensure VTe prevention is prescribed.
• Test for fetomaternal haemorrhage (affects 730%) with a Kleihauer test
and use anti- D immunoglobulin in all rhesus- negative women.
• Chest drains, if required, should be inserted 1– 2 intercostal spaces
above normal.
• A perimortem CS may improve maternal resuscitation if started within
4min of the cardiac arrest starting (see % p. 897).


## 頁面 1010

HeAD AnD TrAUMATIC BrAIn InjUry 989
Head and traumatic brain injury
Head injury is defined as trauma to the cranium, which may include a trau-
matic brain injury. Facial injury is also discussed here.
Head injuries may not be suspected at scene, so head-i njured patients
often present to non- specialist centres and rely on 2° transfer to a neuro-
surgical centre. In the UK, trauma networks have helped to ensure patients
with moderate and severe head trauma are transferred directly to an MTC
with a neurosurgical facility.
Head injuries and traumatic brain injury are often graded by GCS (see
% Table 37.4, p. 990) into mild (GCS 13– 14), moderate (GCS 9–1 2) and
severe (GCS ≤8). There is an increasing probability of poor outcome with
decreasing GCS in a stepwise manner. Overall, 30d mortality following trau-
matic brain injury is 720%. If the initial GCS is reliably obtained and not
tainted by medications or intubation, 720% of the patients with GCS ≤5 will
survive and <10% of these will have a functional survival.32 Age is a strong
factor influencing mortality and morbidity, with children doing better than
adults and adults >60y having significantly worse outcomes.32
There are various ways to define brain injuries. In this text, they are cat-
egorised as 1° or 2° brain injury. 1° injury occurs at the time of impact and 2°
brain injury refers to the changes that occur hours to days after the 1° event.
Primary brain injury
Occurs at the time of the traumatic event and is associated with cranial
fracture, parenchymal contusion, axonal shearing/ laceration and vascular
injury. It can be diffuse or focal.
Secondary brain injury
Occurs after the traumatic event due to the pathophysiological conse-
quences of the 1° injury. It can be exacerbated by reduced cerebral perfu-
sion, ischaemia (global or local) and i metabolic requirements 2° to:
• Hypoxia
• Hypotension
• Intracranial hypertension
• Haemorrhage (intraparenchymal, subdural and extradural)
• Seizures.
The Glasgow Coma Scale and AVPU scores
Calculating the GCS (Table 37.4) accurately is important for planning care
and aiding prognostication after head trauma and traumatic brain injury. For
paediatric patients, see Table 37.5 or use AVPU. reliable calculation must
occur prior to intubation and without the effect of medications, which is not
always possible if therapy has been started prehospital.
Management
Medical therapy cannot affect the impact of 1° traumatic brain injury but
can influence the degree of the 2° insult, potentially salvaging watershed
areas. The principles of managing head-i njured patients therefore are to
optimise cerebral perfusion and oxygenation and reduce ongoing bleeding.
During the 1° survey, management of the airway, control of ventilation
and oxygenation and maintenance of BP are key components to reducing 2°
injury. Anaesthesia to facilitate diagnostic and therapeutic interventions in
the agitated patient with reduced GCS may also be essential.


## 頁面 1011

990
990 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Table 37.4 Glasgow Coma Scale
Response Score
Best motor Obeys commands 6
response Localises pain 5
normal flexion withdrawal (stimulus to supraorbital 4
notch)
Abnormal flexion to pain 3
extension to pain 2
no motor response 1
Best verbal Orientated 5
response Confused 4
Inappropriate words 3
Inarticulate sounds 2
no verbal response 1
eye opening eyes open 4
eyes open to speech 3
eyes open to pain 2
no eye opening 1
reprinted from The Lancet, 304:7872, Teasdale G, jennett B, Assessment of coma and impaired
consciousness, pp. 81– 84, Copyright (1974), with permission from elsevier.
Table 37.5 Modification of GCS for children under 5y
Response Score
Best motor response Obeys commands (>2y) 6
Localises to pain (<2y) 5
normal flexion to pain (>6mo) 4
Abnormal flexion to pain 3
extension to pain 2
no motor response 1
Best verbal response Orientated (>5y) 5
Words (>1y) 4
Vocal sounds (>6mo) 3
Cries (<6mo) 2
no verbal response 1
eye opening eyes open 4
eyes open to speech 3
eyes open to pain 2
no eye opening 1
Using this scoring system, the maximum GCS is 9 at 0– 6mo, 11 at 6– 12mo, 13 at 1– 2y and 14
at 2– 5y.
Source: data from reilly PL, et al., Assessing the conscious level in infants and young children: a
paediatric version of the Glasgow Coma Scale, Childs Nerv Syst, 1988:4(1):30–3.


## 頁面 1012

HeAD AnD TrAUMATIC BrAIn InjUry 991
Airway
Patients with reduced GCS may have impaired laryngeal reflexes and be
unable to protect their airway. Indications for intubation are as per major
trauma (Box 37.2) but, in addition, may include:
• Spontaneous hyperventilation causing PaCO <4.0kPa
2
• To enable CT scan
• recurrent seizures uncontrolled by simple benzodiazepines.
The eTT should be secured with tape, rather than with ties, to prevent
compromising cerebral venous drainage and risk increasing ICP.
Breathing
Adequate oxygenation and ventilation will reduce the risk of 2° brain injury.
CBF is affected by extracellular pH which is, in turn, related to PaCO (see
2
% p. 559).
Once intubated, initial ventilatory strategies should aim for:
• normocapnia: PaCO 4.5–5 .0kPa. Be mindful that eTCO will be
2 2
70.5kPa lower than PaCO33—t ake note of the ABG value. reducing
2
PaCO will result in vasoconstriction and d cerebral perfusion.
2
Hyperventilation to PaCO of 4.0kPa (avoid lower) is recommended as a
2
temporising measure to reduce i ICP, but should be avoided, if possible,
during the first 24h after injury as CBF is often critically reduced.34
• normoxia: SpO >95% and PaO ≥8kPa. recent AoA guidance for
2 2
transfers recommends PaO ≥13kPa.35
2
• V of 6–7 mL/ kg. While lung- protective strategies are preferred, V can
T T
be i, if needed, to prevent hypoxia or hypercapnia.36,37
• PeeP ≤5cmHO: changes to intrathoracic pressure (PeeP) should be
2
minimised to reduce the effects on venous drainage and MAP, and thus
ICP and CBF, respectively.
Circulation
• The injured brain can lose the ability to autoregulate blood flow and is
dependent on systemic pressures. H A single episode of hypotension
(systolic BP <90mmHg) confers a doubling of mortality and an increase
in morbidity during acute management.
• In isolated head injury, aim for MAP of >90mmHg. Mortality may be
reduced and outcomes improved if systolic BP is maintained at:
• ≥100mmHg in patients 50– 69y
• ≥110mmHg in patients 15– 49y and >70y.34
• The recommended target for CPP (CPP = MAP – ICP) is
60– 70mmHg.34
• Trauma patients often present clinical conundrums with opposing
treatment strategies for different injuries. Treatment of the most
life- threatening injury takes precedence. If a trauma patient has
uncontrolled haemorrhage, a systolic BP of 100mmHg is preferred until
haemorrhage control. A systolic BP <90mmHg is associated with poor
outcomes.33
• The correct fluid of resuscitation will depend on other injuries, but
avoidance of hyponatraemia is important. If haemorrhagic shock is
the dominant condition, continue restrictive volume resuscitation; if
traumatic brain injury is the dominant condition, use a less restrictive
volume resuscitation approach to maintain cerebral perfusion. Be


## 頁面 1013

992
992 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
mindful that significant blood loss can occur from isolated scalp wounds
and during operative management of isolated head injuries. Be prepared
to transfuse these patients.
• In isolated head injury with GCS of 9– 12, 1g tranexamic acid should be
given if within 3h of injury and any anticoagulants should be reversed
promptly.19
Disability
The Glasgow Coma Scale, pupillary examination and motor function are key
to neurological assessment and prognostication in traumatic brain injury.
• eyes should be examined for:
• Signs of orbital trauma
• Pupillary response to light
• Pupillary size (>4mm is recommended as a measure of dilated
pupil).34
• Anaesthetists are well positioned at the trauma call to look in the ears
for haemorrhage and CSF indicative of base of skull fracture.
• Analgesia, sedation and adequate nMB are essential in the management
of traumatic brain injury to reduce cerebral metabolism and straining.
TCI propofol is acceptable for maintenance of anaesthesia.
• Keep the neck in the midline and tilt the bed/ trolley to a 30° head- up
position to reduce ICP by improving venous return.
Other considerations
• The use of high- dose barbiturates is only recommended for control of
raised ICP refractory to standard medical and surgical treatment and
can cause significant haemodynamic instability.34
• Post- traumatic seizures are common (up to 12%). Seizure prophylaxis
with phenytoin or levetiracetam should be started, dependent on local
guidelines.
• Seizures in awake patients are managed as normal but would highlight
the possible need for intubation.
• Hyperglycaemia should be avoided.
• Maintain normothermia. There is no evidence supporting early
hypothermia.38 Hyperthermia should be managed aggressively.
• ensure laxatives are prescribed.
Emergent management of raised ICP
• ICP should be kept <22mmHg. Prior to direct measurement
(intraventricular or intraparenchymal), elevated ICP may be identified
by clinical signs or at head CT with ventricular and sulcal effacement,
compression of basal cisterns and herniation.
• raised ICP is associated with pupillary and haemodynamic changes.
In severe traumatic brain injury, abnormalities of pupillary response
or pupil size asymmetries are often associated with neurological
deteriorations and are correlated with poor neurological outcome.39
• Classically, the Cushing reflex is described as hypertension, bradycardia
and apnoea in response to intracranial hypertension. The bradycardia is
often preceded by tachycardia.40


## 頁面 1014

HeAD AnD TrAUMATIC BrAIn InjUry 993
• Patients who develop signs of worsening raised ICP should be managed
immediately (see % p. 560). Temporising therapeutic interventions include:
• Hyperventilation to 4.0kPa
• Mannitol 0.25g/ kg (repeated up to max 1g/ kg). Can drop BP
• Hypertonic sodium chloride 3– 6mL/ kg of 3% (or 2– 6mL/ kg of 5%).
Imaging
Head and C- spine CT may form part of the trauma CT. In isolated head
injuries, nICe guidelines indicate the cohort of adult patients that should
be imaged (Box 37.6).41
Surgically significant abnormalities seen on CT should be discussed with
a neurosurgical unit.
regardless of imaging, other reasons for discussing a patient’s treatment
plan with a neurosurgeon include:
• GCS <8 after initial resuscitation
• Unexplained confusion >4h
• Deterioration in GCS and progressive focal neurology
• A seizure without full recovery
• Definite or suspected penetrating injury
• A CSF leak.
referral and disposition will depend on local guidelines. Transfer of critic-
ally ill patients with traumatic brain injury must be accompanied by a doctor
with suitable competencies and experience in brain injury transfer.35,42
Box 37.6 Summary of NICE indications for head CT in
trauma patients
CT head within 1h of CT head within 8h of
assessment in ED assessment in ED*
• GCS <13 on admission; or GCS • ≥65y
<15 2h after injury • History of bleeding disorder
• Depressed, open or basal skull • Dangerous mechanism of injury
fracture • >30min retrograde amnesia
• Post- traumatic seizure • Patients on anticoagulant
• Focal neurological deficit treatment, with no other
• Vomiting > once indications, should also undergo
a CT head scan within 8h
* If patient has had some loss of consciousness or amnesia since injury, a report should be
available within 1h.
Source: data from national Institute for Health and Care excellence (2019). Head injury:
assessment and early management nICe guideline 176. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/
cg176
Secondary survey
As part of the 2° survey, it is important to check the skull and eyes for other
injuries. Give antibiotics if open skull fractures are present. Base of skull
fractures, although treated conservatively, need to be highlighted such that
nGTs are not inserted.


## 頁面 1015

994
994 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Clinical signs of base of skull fracture
• early signs: haemotympanum, clear fluid and blood from the nose or
ear, scleral haemorrhage with no posterior margin.
• Late signs, 12– 24h post- injury: bruising over the mastoid (Battle’s sign),
orbital bruising (raccoon or panda eyes).
Maxillofacial trauma
• Severe intractable bleeding from maxillofacial injuries, although
uncommon, can be life- threatening and is usually managed as part
of the 1° survey. Managing the airway and ongoing bleeding prior to
interventional radiology or surgical repair is essential. early decision-
making, involvement of other specialists (maxillofacial and enT) and
clearly verbalising the airway plan are important.
• Intubation using VL may be difficult due to bleeding. Direct visualisation
with high- volume suction kit can aid eTT placement.
• Front of neck access should be anticipated and planned for (see %
p. 381).
• Bleeding points are often hard to localise. Severe haemorrhage may
require packing, manual reduction of fractures, balloon tamponade,
angiography with embolisation or direct external carotid artery ligation
to obtain haemostasis. In intubated patients, mid- facial haemorrhage can
be reduced by splinting and stabilising the mid-f acial fractures. Providing
a line of fixation from the clavicles, through the rigid cervical collar,
bite blocks and nasal balloons, allows a degree of haemostasis to be
achieved.43


## 頁面 1016

THOrACIC InjUry 995
Thoracic injury
In the prehospital environment, severe thoracic injury accounts for 25% of
trauma deaths.44 Thoracic trauma can occur after:
• Direct injury: e.g. seat belts, intrusion of vehicle wreckage,
penetrating trauma
• rapid deceleration, resulting in shearing forces that may lead to
traumatic aortic and lung injuries.
The immediate life- threatening conditions (tension pneumothorax, open
pneumothorax, massive haemothorax, flail chest, airway disruption/ ob-
struction and cardiac tamponade) need to be identified and treated rapidly
during the 1° survey; these are addressed on % pp. 974–6. There are six
further potentially life- threatening injuries, which can occur after thoracic
trauma:
• Pulmonary contusion and rib fractures
• Cardiac contusion
• Traumatic aortic injury
• Oesophageal injury
• ruptured diaphragm
• rupture of the tracheobronchial tree.
Pulmonary contusion and rib fractures
Pulmonary contusions and rib fractures are common following blunt thor-
acic trauma and are associated with a high risk of respiratory complications.
Mechanisms include impact, deceleration and seat belt injuries. examination
may reveal external bruising and focal points of tenderness, indicating likely
underlying rib fractures. young adults and children have i chest wall com-
pliance which may result in significant pulmonary contusion without rib frac-
tures, while elderly patients may suffer significant rib injuries after a simple
fall; these can be associated with considerable morbidity and mortality.45
Pulmonary contusions
The earliest indicator of pulmonary contusion is hypoxia.
• CXr may show patchy infiltrates over the affected area but is often
initially normal. It may, however, reveal other pathology which would
raise the suspicion of pulmonary contusion, e.g. rib fractures, flail
segment, haemo- or pneumothorax. Less than 50% of pulmonary
contusions are apparent on admission, compared to 92% at 24h.46
• Typically, hypoxia from lung contusion progresses over 24–4 8h,
associated with reduction in lung compliance and worsening respiratory
distress.
• If these patients are ventilated, they may require higher levels of PeeP
to maintain oxygenation. Lung- protective strategies and careful fluid
resuscitation are also important to avoid worsening lung injury.
Rib fractures
• rib fractures (see % p. 553) are painful; they reduce chest wall
excursion, leading to hypoventilation, and impair coughing ability, leading
to sputum retention. These combine to cause atelectasis. Additionally,
gas exchange is impaired in injured lung tissue, causing V/Q mismatch.
H Inadequate analgesia worsens hypoxia associated with pulmonary
contusion and rib fractures by d ventilation, i atelectasis and i risk of
superimposed infection.


## 頁面 1017

996
996 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• Patients with rib fractures should be managed using a pathway that
incorporates analgesia, respiratory support and physiotherapy.
• Chest trauma scores47 help stratify injury severity and type of analgesia
(e.g. PO/ PCA/ regional nerve catheters/ thoracic epidural) and guide
level of care (i.e. ward/ HDU/ ICU). They include parameters such as
age, number of ribs fractured, comorbidities, concomitant anticoagulant
use and SpO, and sometimes include a frailty score.
2
• Indications for admission, critical care involvement, type of respiratory
support (i.e. mask O/ HFnO/ non- invasive ventilation/ intubation) and
2
further imaging (e.g. chest CT) and indication for referral for rib fixation
can also be included in these protocols.
• Prompt multimodal analgesia, including paracetamol, nSAIDs if
appropriate, oral or PCA opioids, and regional analgesia are essential
to improve the ability to breathe and cough, thereby reducing
complications.
• There are numerous regional analgesia options, each supported
by relatively low- quality evidence. The most widely advocated in
contemporary practice are epidural or paravertebral catheters and
ultrasound-g uided erector spinae (eSP) (see % p. 1130) or serratus
anterior plane blocks. eSP and serratus anterior plane are both
relatively simple, have a lower risk of pneumothorax (compared with
paravertebral) and are safer in anticoagulated patients.
• Serratus anterior plane and eSP catheters can be bolused with 30–4 0mL
of 0.25% levobupivacaine (weight- dependent) ± 1:200 000 adrenaline,
followed by an infusion of 10mL/ h of 0.125% levobupivacaine.
• Paravertebral catheters and epidurals have the best available evidence
base. Paravertebrals can provide a reliable unilateral block with a reduced
side effect profile, compared with thoracic epidurals (see % p. 1128).
• Operative fixation may be indicated if there is significant deformity,
ongoing air leak, uncontrollable pain in spite of optimal analgesia or flail
segments with paradoxical movements.
• Humidified O, nebulised 0.9% sodium chloride and respiratory
2
physiotherapy also help reduce respiratory complications. non-
invasive ventilation or high- flow O reduce atelectasis and improve the
2
paradoxical movement of a flail segment. IPPV should be avoided, if
possible.
Cardiac contusion
• Cardiac contusion should always be suspected in patients with
deceleration injuries and/o r sternal fractures.
• A 12- lead eCG should be performed as part of the 2° survey.
• There is a range of injury from minor myocardial contusion with raised
troponin to free wall or valvular rupture.
• Patients who have an abnormal eCG (ST- segment changes, arrhythmia
such as PVC, SVT or heart block) and raised cardiac markers should be
admitted for 24– 48h with eCG monitoring.
• echocardiography is a useful adjunct when evaluating hypotensive
patients or patients with other clinical signs, including chest pain, eCG
abnormalities and elevated cardiac enzymes. experience is needed to
interpret the subtle signs associated with cardiac contusion.48


## 頁面 1018

THOrACIC InjUry 997
• Often patients with severe cardiac contusion will have other injuries
mandating their admission to HDU/ ICU.
• Severe myocardial contusion may require the use of inotropic support,
and although late complications including heart failure, arrhythmia and
aneurysm have been reported, they are rare.
Traumatic aortic injury
Around 80% of patients with traumatic aortic injury will die at the scene.
Although deceleration and falls account for the majority of cases, pene-
trating trauma is also a recognised cause.49
A high index of suspicion and a low threshold for CT and angiography
are the best diagnostic tools. ‘Cardinal’ CXr signs such as widened medi-
astinum, pleural capping and blunting of the aortic knuckle are not always
present. Checking bilateral BP is of limited value.
The site of the injury will dictate where the blood may collect; damage to
the intrapericardial portion of the aorta will lead to a cardiac tamponade,
and injuries to the extrapericardial aorta will lead to mediastinal haematoma
and haemothorax.
Grade of traumatic aortic injury
• Type 1: intimal tear
• Type 2: intramural haematoma
• Type 3: pseudoaneurysm
• Type 4: rupture (e.g. periaortic haematoma, free rupture).
Management of traumatic aortic injury
• Type 1 injuries: non- operative management consisting of aggressive Hr
and BP control and serial imaging. Systolic BP should be maintained at
100mmHg and Hr <100bpm with β- blockers and vasodilators if not
contraindicated.50
• Type 2, 3 and 4 injuries: repair is recommended. endovascular
intervention is becoming the mainstay of treatment if the anatomy is
favourable due to the significant morbidity associated with open repair.
While awaiting repair, control BP and Hr as per type 1 injuries. Delayed
repair may be appropriate for patients who are haemodynamically
stable with severe coexisting injuries.51
Oesophageal injuries
Oesophageal trauma is uncommon due to the relative protection afforded
by the chest wall. Oesophageal injuries normally occur in two places:
• Lower portion (commonest) associated with severe blunt trauma to the
abdomen
• Cervical region (less common) 2° to penetrating trauma.
Oesophageal rupture leads to mediastinitis, pneumomediastinum and a left-
sided pneumothorax or pleural effusion. Severe pain out of proportion to
the apparent injuries, pain on swallowing and shock should alert the clin-
ician to the presence of an oesophageal injury. Oesophageal rupture carries
a high mortality and early use of antibiotics and surgical repair is recom-
mended52 (see % p. 553 for repair of oesophageal injuries).


## 頁面 1019

998
998 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Ruptured diaphragm
Diaphragmatic rupture can be caused by both blunt and penetrating trauma
to the abdomen. Up to 15% of penetrating thoracoabdominal trauma
will involve the diaphragm. The commonest cause of blunt diaphragmatic
trauma is due to seat belt injuries and is more common from side impact
than frontal collision.4 The left side is more commonly involved, but when
the right hemidiaphragm is involved, hepatothorax can occur. Underlying
vascular damage can initially be masked due to the effect of the liver in
the chest.
Some diaphragmatic injuries are asymptomatic, with the diagnosis made
after CT. However, it is not uncommon for bowel to be felt on finger
thoracostomy. Subsequent herniation and strangulation are a significant
complication. Diaphragmatic rupture requires surgical repair (see % p. 553
for repair of diaphragmatic injuries).
Rupture of the tracheobronchial tree
• Tracheobronchial injuries surviving to hospital treatment are rare.53
Blunt trauma causes include deceleration, hyperextension and shear
forces, while penetrating injuries usually occur in the cervical trachea.
• Although airway management is key to the 1° survey, tracheobronchial
injuries can be missed in 25– 68% of patients.54 There should be raised
suspicion for tracheobronchial injury when SC emphysema is seen over
the neck, a pneumothorax fails to reinflate after insertion of a chest
drain or there is evidence of excessive air leakage.
• Patients with distress and clinical suspicion of airway injury should be
immediately intubated, preferably under FOB guidance to place the
eTT distal to the injury or facilitate one- lung ventilation. Methods of
intubation include orotracheal (direct or VL), fibreoptic, through open
neck wound or tracheostomy.
• Injuries of the intrathoracic airway are more challenging. The use of
long eTTs bypassing the injury for single- lung ventilation has been
recommended.
(See % p. 554 for repair of tracheobronchial injuries.)


## 頁面 1020

ABDOMInAL AnD PeLVIC InjUrIeS 999
Abdominal and pelvic injuries
Abdominal trauma
The 2nd commonest, and leading preventable, cause of death in the first
24h after trauma is major haemorrhage.55 The abdomen is largely unpro-
tected and susceptible to both blunt and penetrating trauma. Solid (e.g. liver,
spleen, kidney) and hollow (e.g. small and large bowel, bladder) abdominal
viscera can be injured, as well as retroperitoneal vessels, diaphragmatic rup-
ture and trauma to the abdominal wall. road traffic collisions account for
the majority of blunt abdominal trauma, while stabbing accounts for most
penetrating cases in the UK.
Abdominal trauma may cause major haemorrhage or soiling of the
peritoneum and may be intra- or retroperitoneal. early haemodynamic
compromise from abdominal injuries arises solely from bleeding; the peri-
toneum can accommodate nearly all of a patient’s circulating blood volume
and represents an uncontrollable bleeding source. eviscerated bowel and
peritoneal blood can both stimulate a vagal response. Patients with serious
injuries who appear physiologically compensated can deteriorate without
warning. Watch for isolated BP drops, unexplained persistent tachycardia
and raised base deficit.
Abdominal trauma can pose a diagnostic and management challenge due
to the spectrum of injury and treatments available. A common dilemma
during management of a trauma patient is deciding if they are stable enough
for CT or if they need to go straight to theatre/ interventional radiology for
immediate treatment. CT imaging can help target surgery, but the delay in
surgical control may be deleterious. Attention to the mechanism and pat-
tern of injury will suggest likely injuries and appropriate resuscitation, while
careful examination of the abdomen, use of eFAST and response to initial
resuscitation will help guide the team. The priority is deciding on the next
course of action, not the definitive diagnosis.
Treatment options
Indications for urgent laparotomy include ongoing blood loss or gross
haemodynamic instability, with or without a positive eFAST examination,
significant solid/ hollow viscus injury, generalised peritonitis, foreign body
in situ or evisceration. If the patient is physiologically well, then a definitive
surgical procedure can be performed; otherwise DCS should be started.
Interventional radiology techniques, such as angiography and embol-
isation, can be used to manage arterial bleeding from solid organs, e.g.
spleen, liver and kidneys, dependent on the grade of injury. These ap-
proaches can preserve organ function, in addition to avoiding surgical mor-
bidity. Interventional radiology can also be used to control bleeding from
abdominal/ thoracic wall vessels. The anaesthetic team must accompany
the patient for any acute interventional radiology procedure, as if the pa-
tient had gone to theatre, to provide continued resuscitation (± DCr),
analgosedation and/ or anaesthesia.56 Interventional radiology procedures
may take place in a remote location, so the usual considerations about re-
mote site anaesthesia apply (see % pp. 823–5).


## 頁面 1021

0010
1000 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Laparoscopy may be used in selected patients with either blunt or pene-
trating trauma as a diagnostic tool and therapeutic technique. The rationale
for this mode of surgery is to reduce the burden of ‘negative laparotomy’
and complications of laparotomy. Indications include suspected hollow
viscus or diaphragmatic injury, free fluid from unknown source/ mesentery
and screening for peritoneal breach.57 Contraindications include haemo-
dynamic instability, absence of indications for open surgery and brain injury.
The patient should be positioned as per a laparotomy in case conversion is
necessary, which occurs in 710– 20% of cases.57
non- operative management comprising monitoring of vital signs, serial
abdominal examinations (more frequently than 4-h ourly) and regular FBC/
blood gases is also increasingly being used. Surgical intervention should
occur if there is haemodynamic instability, signs of peritonitis, a drop in Hb
>30g/ L or a rise in WCC.58
Damage control surgery
(See % pp. 982–3.)
Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta
resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (reBOA) involves
inserting an endovascular balloon, typically via an open femoral artery cut-
down, into the aorta and advancing it to predetermined ‘landing zones’.
The balloon is then inflated to control bleeding below this level. It is a tem-
porising measure for non- compressible, uncontrolled torso haemorrhage.
Three distinct aortic ‘landing zones’ are described:59
• Zone 1: between left subclavian and coeliac artery. Useful for intra-
abdominal haemorrhage. Leads to the greatest physiological changes
• Zone 2: between coeliac artery and the most caudal renal artery.
no- occlusion zone
• Zone 3: between the most caudal renal artery and aortic bifurcation.
Useful for pelvic fractures/h aemorrhage and injuries of the groin/
femoral junction.
The literature is heterogeneous in regard to the indication and patient
population of most benefit; however, growing levels of evidence support
the use of reBOA in selected cases.60
reBOA is a temporising measure, rendering the structures below is-
chaemic; therefore, minimising the inflation duration is key. Patients should
be taken rapidly to theatre where surgical repair of the bleeding source
can be performed. reBOA deflation can lead to hypotension from reduced
afterload and returning cold blood, emboli, ischaemic metabolites and
haemorrhage; it should be done slowly and the balloon reinflated if more
volume resuscitation is needed. The anaesthetic team should be prepared
with volume replacement, drugs and means of managing a cardiac arrest.
Sheath removal may need formal vascular repair.59


## 頁面 1022

ABDOMInAL AnD PeLVIC InjUrIeS 1001
Pelvic injuries
• Pelvic ring injuries occur in 8– 9% of all blunt force trauma and mor tality
rates range from 10% to 50%, depending on the extent of haemorrhage
and associated injuries.
• Life- threatening haemorrhage may result. Most bleeding is usually from
tearing and shearing forces on the venous plexus at the back of the
pelvis. A small proportion is from arterial injury (<10%) and bleeding
from the surface of the fractures themselves.
• Associated urological injuries can result in severe long-t erm disability
and are potentially fatal.
• Open fractures of the pelvis involving the vagina and rectum are
associated with a mortality of 30– 50%. These injuries may be difficult to
diagnose initially.
Injury classification
The young and Burgess classification of pelvic fractures uses three mechan-
istic descriptions, each with degrees of severity.
• AP compression (‘open book’) I–I II. Associated with frontal collisions.
• Lateral compression I– III. Associated with lateral collisions.
• Vertical sheer. Associated with falls from height.
Management
• Immediate management of the unstable patient with pelvic trauma is
placement of a pelvic binder, which reduces the potential space within
the pelvic cavity.61
• The pelvic binder can be left in place for several hours and, if an injury
is identified, should only be removed when personnel are available who
can repair the injury.
• After a pelvic binder is removed, repeat a pelvic X-r ay.
• Haemorrhage control can be achieved by:
• Pelvic external fixation— will clamp both sides of the pelvis together,
reducing pelvic volume and tamponading bleeding. This will take
precedence over laparotomy in an open book or vertical shear
fracture.
• Pelvic packing to manage venous bleeding in the unstable patient.
• Selective angiography and embolisation to manage arterial bleeding.
• A single gentle attempt at catheterisation by an experienced doctor is
permissible, even if the CT findings suggest urethral injury.
• note, multiple surgical teams may be operating at once in pelvic injuries.


## 頁面 1023

0012
1002 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Spinal trauma
Between 250 000 and 500 000 patients around the world suffer a spinal
cord injury each year. Of these, 790% are due to traumatic events such as
road traffic collisions, falls and violence. Outcome after a spinal cord injury
depends on the severity and location of the lesion. Below the level of in-
jury, there may be complete or partial loss of sensory/m otor function. The
commonest level affected is C5.62 Patients with spinal cord injuries are 2–5
times more likely to die prematurely.63
The 1° spinal cord injury results from the initial traumatic event, directly
damaging ascending and descending pathways and blood vessels. The com-
monest 1° mechanism of spinal cord injury is an impact, followed by con-
tinued compression.64 The acute phase of 2° injury occurs within minutes of
the 1° event and results from the consequences of the 1° injury, including:
local haemorrhage, hypotension, vasospasm, hypoperfusion, ischaemia,
cytokine release, oedema and neurotransmitter accumulation.63,64
The principles of management of a spinal cord injury are similar to those
of traumatic brain injury. The aims are to preserve neurological function and
reduce further injury by minimising 2° injury. The most effective treatment
in this case is early surgical decompression within 8h of injury.65
Primary survey
• On arrival in the eD, the patient may be on a vacuum mattress, ‘scoop’
or spinal board. Historically, spinal boards have been used for transport,
but these are extrication devices only. They should be removed as soon
as possible in the eD to avoid pressure areas developing using a ‘log roll’
technique (see % p. 1003). every movement of the patient should be
well coordinated.
• The mechanism of injury, signs and symptoms will alert the team to
the presence of a spinal cord injury. Polytrauma patients should always
be considered as having a spinal cord injury until formal assessment,
including radiological investigations, has been completed.
Airway and cervical spine control
• Patients should arrive in the eD with C- spine control and spinal motion
restriction; however, this is not always the case. When performing
MILS or placing a hard collar, no patient should have their head or
neck forced into a neutral spine position and no deformity should be
reduced.4
• early intubation and ventilation may be required as high cervical injury
above C3 leads to apnoeic respiratory arrest. Patients with spinal cord
injury are also at a higher risk of aspiration.66 (See % pp. 972–4 for
information regarding intubating the immobilised patient.)
Breathing
Supported ventilation may be required in the patient who has a thoracic
injury or cervical injury sparing the diaphragm (C3– 5) due to reduced
chest excursion. respiratory effort may deteriorate over time in the supine
patient.


## 頁面 1024

SPInAL TrAUMA 1003
Circulation
neurogenic shock, due to sudden loss of autonomic tone, may develop in
a patient with a cervical or high thoracic injury. Bradycardia and hypoten-
sion (systolic BP <90mmHg) in the presence of cervical or high thoracic
trauma should be managed with fluid and vasopressor infusion to maintain
a spinal cord perfusion pressure >60– 65mmHg,67 which in practice entails
maintaining a MAP >85– 90mmHg for 5– 7d after injury.62 Metaraminol is a
simple 1st-l ine choice, but central venous access to facilitate noradrenaline
is recommended. When the injury is associated with polytrauma, every ef-
fort must be made to avoid ongoing haemorrhage. It may not be possible
to differentiate between the two causes of shock, especially when there is
loss of sensation below the injury level.
Disability
• The ASIA chart is currently the most widely accepted and employed
clinical record for spinal cord injury. The ASIA chart is repeated at 48h
to ascertain if the injury is incomplete or complete. A complete spinal
cord injury is suspected when there has been no change in neurological
deficit in this time.
• The ASIA chart is performed as part of the 2° survey, and perianal
sensation and tone should be included as this may demonstrate sacral
sparing. Prognostication may be complicated by the presence of spinal
shock and should not be discussed as part of the initial assessment and
management.
Log roll
‘Log rolling’ a patient requires a minimum of five people: three to control
the patient’s body and limbs, ensuring minimal movement of the spine; one
to control the C-s pine and lead the log roll; and one to inspect the back.
Often formal examination of the back is delayed until after the trauma CT.
removing the trauma scoop should be done using a modified log roll, util-
ising the smallest tilt/ brace required to remove the split board.
Spinal shock
Generally, this is a reversible condition where there is complete loss of
sensation, muscle tone, power, autonomic activity and areflexia below the
level of the injury. This can last anywhere from hours to a number of weeks.
(See also % p. 303.)
Autonomic dysreflexia
rarely seen in the acute stage of spinal cord injury, but occasionally oc-
curs in the following days and weeks. Most often occurs with lesions
above T6. Defined as episodic hypertension and associated bradycardia
(baroreceptor- mediated) due to disorganised autonomic reflexes. Life-
threatening hypertension can occur, precipitated by noxious stimuli below
the level of the injury, most commonly bladder or bowel distension. Other
symptoms include headache, sweating, flushing and anxiety. Management is
focused around removing the stimulus and acutely managing the hyperten-
sion. Head- up positioning and short- acting agents such as GTn sublingual
spray (400 micrograms) and sublingual nifedipine (5– 10mg) are all treat-
ment strategies.


## 頁面 1025

0014
1004 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Limb and extremity injuries
• extremity injuries are very common in the polytrauma patient.
Assessment of extremity and soft tissue trauma usually falls into
the 2° survey, unless there are features of significant uncontrolled
haemorrhage or closed long bone fractures of the femur.
• Management of open fractures and extremity lacerations should follow
the principles of haemorrhage control using tourniquets and splinting.
Femoral fractures can account for 1– 1.5L of blood loss. Alignment of a
displaced fracture and traction splinting should occur in the 1° survey if
there are features of paraesthesiae, poor circulation or cardiovascular
instability.
• Limb- threatening soft tissue injuries requiring urgent intervention
include:
• Vascular injuries proximal to the elbow or knee
• Major joint dislocations
• Crush injury
• Compartment syndrome
• Open fracture
• Fracture with neurovascular injury.
• Arterial injuries associated with fracture or dislocation are rare, but
the limb must be revascularised as a surgical emergency, as after
3– 4h, irreversible tissue damage can occur. Common sites of arterial
involvement include knee and elbow dislocations and severe tibial
and femoral fractures. Diagnosis of an ischaemic limb can be aided by
waveform SpO.68
2
• Manipulation and reduction of orthopaedic injuries can occur in the eD.
Common agents used for provision of analgesia ± anaesthesia in this
setting include ketamine, fentanyl and methoxyflurane (Penthrox™).
• relocation or realignment and immobilisation of fracture sites
significantly reduces pain and may reduce bleeding.
• A careful examination of the peripheral nervous and vascular systems
must be performed and clearly recorded for all injuries. This must be
repeated and recorded after any manipulation or surgery.
• For open fractures, IV antibiotics should be given within 1h of injury69
and local guidelines will dictate the choice.
• In the UK, hind- or mid- foot fractures and compound fractures of long
bones need to be discussed with, and possibly transferred to, a centre
which can provide orthoplastic care.
• Fat embolism (see % p. 614) is associated with long bone injury and
manipulation, particularly compound femoral fractures. Although it is
generally rare, it can be fatal in up to 15% of patients.
• extremity trauma can be extremely painful and may progress to chronic
pain.70 Aggressive multimodal analgesia is warranted, including early use
of antineuropathic agents.
• regional nerve blocks, e.g. fascia iliaca blocks (see % p. 1135), are
routinely placed in the eD for pain control. Documentation of the block
must be clear. There is controversy over their use in patients at risk of
compartment syndrome, compounded by a lack of high-q uality evidence.
There are case reports illustrating that peripheral nerve blocks both
do, and do not, mask the pain of compartment syndrome. A recent


## 頁面 1026

LIMB AnD eXTreMITy InjUrIeS 1005
systematic review concluded that peripheral nerve blocks do not affect
the pain perception from acute compartment syndrome,71 although
epidurals may delay the diagnosis.72 The risk, in part, depends on the
type and location of the fracture and the planned surgical management,
e.g. if fasciotomies are planned as part of immediate surgical repair,
compartment syndrome is unlikely to be a problem. It is wise to discuss
the use of regional anaesthesia with the orthopaedic/t rauma team on a
case-b y-c ase basis prior to performing any procedure.
Compartment syndrome
• Is a limb- and potentially life- threatening condition that occurs when
injured muscle groups contained in poorly compliant osseofascial
compartments expand, creating a tissue pressure greater than the
perfusion pressure, leading to ischaemia and tissue necrosis. If
prolonged, permanent muscle and nerve damage can occur.
• It is most commonly caused by trauma (soft tissue, with or without
fracture), typically closed fractures of the tibia and forearm,73 crush
injuries and burns.
• Pulses are often present early and it is the presence of ‘out-o f-
proportion pain’ and pain on passive movement which will raise the
clinical suspicion. Swelling, skin turgor, sensory deficits and paresis may
also occur.
• Diagnosis is clinical and notoriously difficult; therefore, a high index of
clinical suspicion is required. Compartment pressures can be measured
in sedated patients— a difference of 30mmHg between the diastolic
BP and the compartment pressure suggests an i risk of compartment
syndrome. An absolute compartment pressure of 40mmHg, with
clinical symptoms, indicates a consideration for urgent fasciotomy for
decompression.
• When diagnosed, fasciotomy should occur within <1h.


## 頁面 1027

0016
1006 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Gunshot, blast and crush injuries
Gunshot injury
Gunshot wounds are associated with extensive tissue damage caused by the
transfer of kinetic energy. Low- velocity bullets, such as from a pistol, result
in crush and laceration injuries. Secondary projectile, e.g. bone or bullet
fragments, may move on unpredictable trajectories. High-v elocity rounds,
such as fired by a rifle, create a rapidly expanding and collapsing vacuum in
the wake of the bullet’s trajectory, sucking in debris. This results in cavity
formation and significant tissue destruction not just in the path of the bullet,
but also in surrounding tissues. The degree of tissue destruction and cavi-
tation is affected by the yaw and tumble motion of the bullet along the tra-
jectory within the body. A small entry wound can belie the extent of tissue
injury. The unpredictable path of the bullet and contamination throughout
its course are responsible for significant injury. Surgical debridement of all
devascularised or soiled tissue is imperative to avoid sepsis.
Blast- related injury
Injuries result from exposure to pressure waves caused by explosions and
can result in unique injury patterns, which are not commonly seen, in mul-
tiple patients at the same time. Injury severity is determined by the type of
explosive device, the geography of the explosion (enclosed spaces reflect
the blast wave) and the proximity of the victim. The predominant injury
patterns in survivors are a combination of standard penetrating and blunt
trauma. Blast injuries can be defined by five mechanisms (Table 37.6).
Primary blast lung injury
Primary blast lung injury (often called ‘blast lung’) is the commonest, fatal,
1° blast injury among initial survivors.74 The lungs are particularly prone to
damage, with widespread disruption of the alveolar–c apillary membrane,
leading to air embolus and hypoxia. Patients are at high risk of pulmonary
oedema. It is rare for this injury to exist in isolation. ‘Blast lung’ is a clinical
diagnosis and characterised by V/Q mismatch, hypoxaemia and dyspnoea.
Pulmonary injuries can range from scattered petechiae to confluent haem-
orrhage, sometimes with associated pneumothoraces. The pattern of in-
filtration produces a classic butterfly appearance on CXr; however, initial
imaging may not demonstrate the extent of the damage. An inflammatory
phase follows the initial injury.
Embolic events
Air embolism is thought to be an early cause of death for non- survivors at
the scene. Pulmonary fat embolism may be detected in as many as 75% of
casualties.75
Management
Management of these patients is as for all trauma patients; however, specific
mention should be made of the following:
• Always consider tension pneumothoraces which need to be treated
urgently.
• Confusion and agitation are common and may be due to the blast wave
itself or to cerebral air embolism.


## 頁面 1028

GUnSHOT, BLAST AnD CrUSH InjUrIeS 1007
Table 37.6 Mechanisms of trauma in blast injuries
Type Characteristics
Primary Mechanism: overpressurisation by the blast wave causes rapid
compression and expansion of gas- filled structures
Affects: gas- filled structures
Examples: blast lung, bowel haemorrhage and perforation
from shear forces, tympanic membrane rupture and middle
ear damage, globe rupture, traumatic brain injury without
signs of head injury
Secondary Mechanism: flying debris and bomb fragments
Affects: any part
Examples: penetrating ballistic (fragments) or blunt injuries,
eye penetration (± occult)
Tertiary Mechanism: individual thrown by, or crushed by structures
thrown by, the blast wind
Affects: typically blunt injuries to any body part
Examples: fractures and traumatic amputation, closed and
open traumatic brain injury
Quaternary Mechanism: all explosion- related injuries, illnesses or diseases
not due to the above. Includes exacerbation or complications
of existing conditions
Affects: any part
Examples: burns, inhalational injuries, crush injuries, closed
and open traumatic brain injury, respiratory disease from
dust, smoke or toxic fume inhalation, angina, hyperglycaemia,
hypertension
Quinary Mechanism: tissue contamination from post- detonation
environment
Affects: any part
Examples: nuclear, biological, chemical, bloodborne viruses,
human remains
• Lung injury is often heterogeneous and lung- protective ventilation
strategies should be employed to avoid overdistension of unaffected
alveoli. note, permissive hypercapnia may have deleterious effects in
the polytrauma patient with head injury.
• Lung compliance is often reduced and i PeeP may be required.
• Hypoxia may be a consequence of inhalational injury or toxic fumes, as
well as ‘blast lung’.
• Appropriate personal protective equipment and strategies to
protect personnel must be employed if there is suspicion of toxic
contamination.
• The tympanic membrane is the most vulnerable structure to 1° blast
injury and should be visualised during the 2° survey, if not before.

### 表格

<!-- Table 1 -->
| Table 37.6 Mechanisms of trauma in blast injuries |
| --- |
| Type Characteristics |
| Primary Mechanism: overpressurisation by the blast wave causes rapid compression and expansion of gas- filled structures Affects: gas- filled structures Examples: blast lung, bowel haemorrhage and perforation from shear forces, tympanic membrane rupture and middle ear damage, globe rupture, traumatic brain injury without signs of head injury Secondary Mechanism: flying debris and bomb fragments Affects: any part Examples: penetrating ballistic (fragments) or blunt injuries, eye penetration (± occult) Tertiary Mechanism: individual thrown by, or crushed by structures thrown by, the blast wind Affects: typically blunt injuries to any body part Examples: fractures and traumatic amputation, closed and open traumatic brain injury Quaternary Mechanism: all explosion- related injuries, illnesses or diseases not due to the above. Includes exacerbation or complications of existing conditions Affects: any part Examples: burns, inhalational injuries, crush injuries, closed and open traumatic brain injury, respiratory disease from dust, smoke or toxic fume inhalation, angina, hyperglycaemia, hypertension Quinary Mechanism: tissue contamination from post- detonation environment Affects: any part Examples: nuclear, biological, chemical, bloodborne viruses, human remains |
|  |


## 頁面 1029

0018
1008 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Crush injury
Crush injuries are caused by physical compression leading to direct injury
or ischaemia.76 The limbs are most commonly involved (legs > arms), but
multiple injury patterns are possible. Injury severity is determined by the
magnitude and duration of the crush.
• Fractures and open injuries will require standard treatment of fixation,
debridement, tetanus toxoid and antibiotics.
• Compressive forces to the torso can cause a wide spectrum of blunt
or penetrating injuries, including organ contusions/r upture, vascular
damage, fractures, haemorrhage and evisceration. Standard treatments,
including lung- protective ventilation, pelvic binders and prompt
multimodal analgesia, are required.
Crush syndrome: if significant muscle mass is crushed, potentially life-
threatening systemic manifestations, known as ‘crush syndrome’, may
occur. Crush syndrome results from traumatic rhabdomyolysis and the re-
lease of intracellular contents (K+, myoglobin, phosphate, urate and CK)
into the circulation following reperfusion of the injured muscle/o rgan.
The systemic effects and their management include:
• reperfusion can lead to acute hypovolaemia and hypotension.
Significant volume/ fluid replacement may be needed to compensate
for fluid sequestration into the interstitium, to restore BP and to
maintain renal perfusion. Infusions and boluses should be titrated to the
individual patient and regularly reassessed.
• rhabdomyolysis:
• AKI may occur from myoglobinuria. Mannitol may be needed initially
to encourage diuresis, but haemofiltration/ dialysis may also be
required later.
• electrolyte disturbances/ metabolic abnormalities— hyperkalaemia
and hypocalcaemia. Observe for cardiac arrhythmias and correct as
required.
• Metabolic abnormalities: lactic acidosis resulting from ischaemic
tissues can exacerbate the electrolyte abnormalities.
• Sodium bicarbonate 8.4% 1mL/ kg slow bolus, with further doses
titrated to effect, can help.
• Compartment syndrome can occur as injured tissues swell. Prophylactic
fasciotomies may be needed.
• In addition to the specific nuances of crush syndrome, multiorgan
failure, ArDS, TIC and sepsis can also occur.


## 頁面 1030

TrAUMATIC CArDIAC ArreST 1009
Traumatic cardiac arrest
A cardiac arrest 2° to trauma is managed differently to a cardiac arrest due
to a medical cause. Importantly, should the mechanism of injury and col-
lateral history suggest a 1° medical arrest, followed by trauma (e.g. single-
vehicle accident without brakes being applied or low- impact trauma leading
to cardiac arrest), then standard ALS should be instituted. VF and pulseless
VT are usually associated with non- traumatic cardiac arrest; however, PeA
and asystole are more common in traumatic cardiac arrest. The 1° goals
in traumatic cardiac arrest are to stop exsanguination, relieve obstructive
causes of shock and optimise oxygenation/ ventilation.
Survival after traumatic cardiac arrest is poor. Overall survival rates
with penetrating trauma are 5–1 0%. Patients with isolated cardiac wounds
treated by expert teams can achieve greater survival rates. Patients with
blunt trauma have a worse outcome, and resuscitative thoracotomy is most
likely to be successful if the patient has vital signs on admission and CPr has
been performed for <15min77 (Fig. 37.1).
Indicators of the potential for favourable outcome after traumatic cardiac
arrest include:
• Penetrating injury, especially single puncture with a knife (rather than a
bullet) and rV injury
• Presence of signs of life at any time since medical contact
• Cardiac arrest <10min
• Visible cardiac activity on eFAST.
Management priorities for traumatic cardiac arrest
The below interventions should be performed concurrently by a
trauma team.
Deprioritise chest compression
• Chest compressions are unhelpful in extreme hypovolaemia and
potentially in tamponade. They also impede the ability to deliver
potentially lifesaving procedures, may worsen injuries, add iatrogenic
injuries and can slow transfusion from rapid infusors.
• Once a reversible cause has been corrected, chest compressions may
help to support organ perfusion while blood volume resuscitation
continues.
Optimise oxygenation and ventilation
• Give 100% O and intubate the patient. If the intubation is difficult,
2
consider using an SGA.
• Perform bilateral open thoracostomies in the 4th to 5th intercostal
space, anterior axillary line, to release tension pneumothoraces.
Stop bleeding
• Temporising methods include direct and indirect pressure, haemostatic
agents, tourniquets, pelvic binders, reBOA and resuscitative
thoracotomy.
• Transfer to an operating theatre, interventional radiology or hybrid
suite for definitive management should occur as soon as practicable for
definitive haemorrhage control.


## 頁面 1031

0101
1010 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Actively restore physiology
• The principles are as per DCr (see % pp. 982–7)— obtaining vascular
access, aggressive restoration of circulating volume using haemostatic
principles and warming the patient.
Resuscitative thoracotomy
A resuscitative thoracotomy is a bilateral anterior (‘clamshell’) thoracotomy
performed prehospital, in the eD or in the operating theatre as part of the
immediate lifesaving resuscitation.
Indications
Accepted Penetrating chest/ epigastric injury associated with cardiac
arrest (any rhythm) or periarrest (e.g. decompensating
tamponade/ persistent hypotension) within last 10min
relative Penetrating intra- / extrathoracic injury, pulseless and
absent signs of life*, CPr <15min
Blunt thoracic injury with cardiac arrest and previous signs
of life
Contra- CPr for >15min or >10min without response for
indications penetrating and blunt trauma injury, respectively
Unsurvivable concomitant injuries
* Signs of life = pulse, movements, GCS >3, eye or gag reflexes and cardiac activity on eCG or
ultrasound.
Preparation
Achieving a good outcome from resuscitative thoracotomy relies on a
number of components:
• A clear goal:
• release of cardiac tamponade
• Control of cardiac, vascular or pulmonary haemorrhage
• Occlusion of descending thoracic aorta to reduce haemorrhage
below the diaphragm and increase blood flow to heart and brain
• Control of air embolism
• Provision of open cardiac massage.
• Personnel should have the expertise to perform the procedure.
• It needs a team approach with clear direction. If the TTL is the only
individual skilled in resuscitative thoracotomy, they should temporarily
hand over team leadership to another senior team member to allow
them to task- focus. The anaesthetist is responsible for securing the
airway and may be required to gain large- bore or central venous access.
• There needs to be a clear chain of survival such that when rOSC is
achieved, ongoing care is planned and there is no hiatus in the flow of
treatment.
• It is important to recognise that once initiated, the ongoing management
of resuscitative thoracotomy and traumatic cardiac arrest will use a
large number of personnel and resources.
• TCA should not be attempted if:
• There are no signs of life within the previous 15min
• Trauma is incompatible with life, e.g. decapitation or brain tissue loss.


## 頁面 1032

TrAUMATIC CArDIAC ArreST 1011
Procedure78
• Stop CPr.
• ensure the patient has an eTT or SGA in place.
• Perform bilateral finger thoracostomy in the 4th or 5th
intercostal space.
• Connect the two thoracostomies with a clamshell incision, using heavy-
duty (e.g. TuffCutt®) scissors or similar, to cross the sternum.
• Insert a retractor to open the chest cavity to the maximal extent.
• Lift the pericardium with forceps and make a midline longitudinal inverse
‘T’ incision to the pericardium. This avoids the phrenic nerves which
pass laterally on the pericardial sac.
• Deliver the heart from the pericardial sac.
• Close any wounds to the cardiac muscle with staple or interrupted
sutures. If you are unsure what to do, you can put a finger in the hole
temporarily.
• A 2nd operator can provide pressure on the descending aorta.
• Concurrently infuse blood and blood products. The right atrial
appendage can be used if vascular access is not possible to obtain.
• Control any bleeding that may be evident after rOSC, especially the
internal mammary arteries.
• resuscitation should be terminated as a team decision and should be
considered if:
• There is no rOSC after reversible causes have been addressed
• There is no evidence of cardiac activity in the absence of a
tamponade (if ultrasound is used prior to thoracotomy).


## 頁面 1033

0121
1012 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Fig. 37.1 Traumatic cardiac arrest algorithm. Local guidelines may be adapted to
include the use of ultrasound and variations for the gravid patient. reprinted from
resuscitation, 95, Truhlar A et al., european resuscitation Council Guidelines for resuscitation
2015, Section 4. Cardiac arrest in special circumstances, 148–2 01, Copyright © 2015, with
permission from the european resuscitation Council and elsevier.


## 頁面 1034

BUrnS: eArLy MAnAGeMenT 1013
Burns: early management
(See also % p. 665.)
General considerations
• Major burns account for 5% of traumatic injuries across the UK.79
• Treat life- threatening injuries; traumatic injuries and burns often coexist.
• Fire is the commonest cause of burns in adults; scalding is the
commonest cause in children. Most injuries occur at home.
• Burns may be associated with alcohol intoxication, epilepsy or
psychiatric illness.
• Consider the possibility of non- accidental injury in children.
• Mortality is related to age, total body surface area (TBSA) burnt, burn
depth, presence of inhalational injury and hypothermia. Commonly
used burns prognostic scoring systems, e.g. BOBI (Belgian Outcome
of Burn Injury) score, FLAMeS (Fatality by Longevity, APACHe II
score, Measured extent of burn and Sex), revised Baux score and ABSI
(Abbreviated Burn Severity Index), use these parameters with various
weightings. Use Box 37.7 to guide decision about transfer to a major
burns centre.
Airway (with cervical spine control)
• Burns to the head and neck may rapidly cause airway obstruction from
oedema. Inhalation of hot gases usually causes airway injury above the
larynx.
• Signs of potential airway compromise: singed nasal hairs, hoarse voice,
productive cough and soot-s tained sputum.
• Clinical judgement will determine the need for immediate intubation.
Maximum wound oedema occurs 12– 36h after injury when
fluid resuscitation is well under way, although the airway may be
compromised much earlier. H If in doubt, intubate early using a large,
uncut ETT; subsequent oedema can be considerable.80
• Clinical features shown to correlate with intubation include: full-
thickness facial burns, stridor, respiratory distress, oedema on
laryngoscopy, smoke inhalation and singed nasal hairs.81
• When considering a surgical airway with overlying burns, a longitudinal
incision is advised.
Breathing
• Give O 15L/ min, using a face mask with a reservoir bag, aiming for
2
saturations of 94– 98%.82
• Intubation may be required in patients who are:
• Unconscious from coexisting trauma or from inhalation of toxic
substances such as carbon monoxide (CO)
• Developing acute respiratory failure due to smoke inhalation or
blast injury
• In need of extensive resuscitation, sedation and analgesia following a
major burn.


## 頁面 1035

0141
1014 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Circulation (with haemorrhage control)
• Burns >25% TBSA produce a marked systemic inflammatory response,
accompanied by an increase in capillary permeability and generalised
oedema.
• Insert cannulae through intact skin, wherever possible. Start IV fluids
for burns:
• >15% TBSA in adults (some units advocate 20%)
• >10% TBSA in children.
• Hartmann’s solution is the preferred resuscitation fluid for burns.
• The fluid requirement in the first 24h in adults and children is 2–4 mL/
kg/ % TBSA. Give half the calculated fluid in the first 8h from the time
of injury, and give the remainder in the next 16h.
• Maintenance fluids are required, in addition to the calculated
resuscitation fluid. ensure fluid is warmed.
• These calculated values are an estimate. Volume required will be guided
by the urine output (>0.5– 1.0mL/ kg), blood gas values and CVS
response.
• Test the urine for haemochromogens (myoglobin/ Hb) arising from
muscle damage and red cell breakdown. If positive:
• Increase the urine output to 1–2 mL/ kg/ h.
• Alkalinise urine: infuse 1.25% sodium bicarbonate solution.
• Promote diuresis: add 12.5g of mannitol to each litre of Hartmann’s
solution.
Neurological deficit
• Head injury is common in burns associated with road traffic collisions,
falls and blasts.
• CO poisoning and alcohol intoxication are common causes of altered
consciousness.
Exposure (with temperature control)
• remove all clothing to assess the extent of burn injury. If clothing is
stuck to the skin, cut around the area, leaving the adherent fabric in
place. Keep the patient warm.
• Assess the percentage TBSA burnt. The ‘rule of nines’ conveniently
divides the adult body surface into multiples of 9%; this is inaccurate
for small children. The palmar surface of a patient’s hand and fingers
is 71% TBSA. Mobile phone applications such as Mersey Burns (M
https:// merseyburns.com) can be useful in TBSA estimation. Detailed
assessment of the burn area is made by referring to a Lund and
Browder chart (Fig. 37.2; Table 37.7).
• Assess the burn depth; burns may be superficial or deep; in practice,
most injuries are a mixture of both.
• Superficial: affecting the epidermis only (sunburn, flash burns) or
involving the superficial part of the dermis (producing a blister).
These burns are painful and pinprick sensation is preserved. Healing
will occur without the need for grafting.
• Deep: consisting of deep dermal burns (no capillary refill beneath
the blister, since blood vessels are destroyed) or full- thickness
burns (involving the entire epidermis and dermis, possibly including
underlying structures). Burns may have a white, waxy appearance.
Pinprick sensation is lost.


## 頁面 1036

BUrnS: eArLy MAnAGeMenT 1015
Fig. 37.2 Lund and Browder chart.
Table 37.7 Percentage of area affected by growth
1mo 1y 5y 10y 15y Adult
Half of head 91/
2
81/
2
61/
2
51/
2
41/
2
31/
2
Half of thigh 23/
4
31/
4
4 41/
2
41/
2
43/
4
Half of leg 21/
2
21/
2
23/
4
3 31/
4
31/
2
Immediate wound care
• Cool the burn wound with cold running water (12ºC is optimal);83 this
helps reduce the production of inflammatory mediators and reduces
tissue damage. Continue cooling for at least 20min. Cooling the burn is
an effective analgesic and can be done up to 3h after the initial injury.84
H Monitor for hypothermia which is independently associated with i
mortality.85
• Burns are initially sterile. Cover with ‘cling film’ to limit evaporation and
heat loss and reduce pain.
Monitoring
• Monitor SpO, eCG, urine output, core temperature and nIBP.
2
The pulse oximeter cannot detect COHb and will over-r ead the O
2
saturation of Hb; use a co-o ximeter to obtain an accurate estimation of
the percentage of oxyhaemoglobin.
• Arterial lines for patients with major burns or inhalational injury.
• Gastroparesis is common, so insert an nGT if major burns.


## 頁面 1037

0161
1016 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
• Check FBC (including Hct), urea/ creatinine, electrolytes, glucose and
COHb; X- match blood and consider trace elements (copper, selenium,
zinc) in severe burns.
Analgesia
• Analgesia is important. Although skin sensation is lost over deep burns,
the surrounding area is very painful.
• There is no evidence to support the use of any particular opioid.
Morphine, fentanyl and methoxyflurane are equally efficacious.86
Ongoing analgesia with PCA may be necessary.
Escharotomy
• eschar is the coagulated dead skin of a full-t hickness burn; it cannot
expand, as tissue oedema progresses. Circumferential burns to limbs
may result in limb ischaemia; circumferential burns to the trunk may
reduce chest wall compliance and impede ventilation.
• escharotomy, the release of the burn wound by incision down to SC fat,
is performed in the operating room. Incisions are made longitudinally
along the medial and lateral sides of the limbs; on the trunk, incisions
are made along the anterior axillary line down to the upper abdomen.
ensure blood is available; bleeding can be extreme.
• Patients are often already sedated and ventilated. Lightly sedated
patients will need additional sedation and analgesia.
Special circumstances
Inhalation of toxic substances
CO poisoning is common— check COHb. The severity of symptoms may
not correlate with the percentage of COHb and may mimic alcohol intoxi-
cation (Table 37.8).
• CO reduces the capacity of blood to carry O, causing tissue hypoxia.
2
PaO is normal. CO also binds avidly to other haem-c ontaining
2
compounds, especially the cytochrome system. The half-l ife of COHb is
250min when breathing room air; this is reduced to 40min when breathing
100% O. O therapy should be continued, since a 2° peak of COHb
2 2
occurs after 24h and is attributed to washout of CO from cytochromes.
• Hyperbaric O therapy reduces the half-l ife of COHb to just 15– 30min;
2
however, the precise role of hyperbaric O is controversial87 and is
2
highly subject to the availability of hyperbaric facilities. Indications for
discussion with a hyperbaric facility include:
• Any loss of consciousness, neurological abnormality or cognitive
impairment
• Chest pain, abnormal eCG and cardiac enzymes
• Pregnancy
• Inability to assess adequately.
• Other toxic products of combustion may include cyanide; ammonia;
phosgene; hydrogen chloride, fluoride or bromide; and complex organic
compounds. These toxic substances may produce:
• A chemical burn to the respiratory tract
• Interstitial lung oedema, impaired gas exchange and ArDS
• Systemic acid– base disturbances
• rising lactate without hypoxia.
• Hydrofluoric acid binding serum Ca2+ and causing hypocalcaemia.


## 頁面 1038

BUrnS: eArLy MAnAGeMenT 1017
Table 37.8 Symptoms associated with CO poisoning
COHb (%) Symptoms
0– 15 none (smokers)
15– 20 Headache, mild confusion
20– 40 nausea and vomiting, disorientation, fatigue
40– 60 Hallucinations, ataxia, fits, coma
>60 Death
Chemical burns
• Hands and upper limbs are the most frequently affected areas.
• Staff must protect themselves with gloves, apron and face mask.
• remove contaminated clothing as early as possible and place in a secure
container for disposal.
• Industrial or household alkalis and acids are commonly used chemicals,
e.g. bleach, washing powder, disinfectants, drain cleaner, paint stripper.
Immersion in complex hydrocarbons (petrol, diesel) without ignition
may cause systemic toxicity. Phosphorus burns may result from
fireworks or military applications.
• Tissue damage continues until the chemical is neutralised or diluted with
water. early, continuous and prolonged (1h) irrigation with cold water is
vital for burns (except elemental na, K and lithium).
• Specific treatments include:
• Hydrofluoric acid: used in the glass industry, highly toxic. Burns of 2%
TBSA can be fatal. Tissue penetration by fluoride ions causes deep
chemical burns. Inactivate toxic fluoride ions by application of topical
calcium gluconate burn gel and 10% calcium gluconate injections
into the burn wound (0.5mL/ cm2 of surface burn), extending 0.5cm
beyond the burn margin. Do not use calcium chloride; it is an irritant.
Consider intra- arterial (10mL of 10% calcium gluconate in 40mL of
5% glucose over 4h) or IV (Bier’s block; 10– 15mL of 10% calcium
gluconate plus 5000 units of heparin, diluted up to 40mL in 5%
glucose).
• Phosphorus: white phosphorus ignites spontaneously when exposed
to air; it can be extinguished by water. Apply copper sulphate
solution, converting phosphorus to black cupric phosphide.
• Bitumen: common injury in the UK from road maintenance. It is liquid
at 150°C and causes thermal burns. Cool with water; remove the
bitumen with vegetable or paraffin oil.
• Cyanide: hydroxocobalamin 5mg IV or 12.5g sodium thiosulfate
should be considered in patients with features of cyanide poisoning.
These treatments are controversial but have fewer side effects than
dicobalt edetate which should be reserved for confirmed cases of
cyanide poisoning.


## 頁面 1039

0181
1018 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Electrical burns
• Low voltage (<1000V) causes a local contact burn. The 50Hz
alternating current (AC) domestic supply is particularly likely to cause
cardiac arrest. Muscle spasm may prevent release of the electrical
source. There is no associated deep tissue damage.
• High voltage (>1000V) causes flash burn or deep tissue damage due
to current transmission. High- voltage cables carry 11 000 or 33 000V;
electric shock produces an entrance and exit wound, which may require
fasciotomy under GA. Haemochromogens released from muscle and
damaged red cells may cause AKI.
• A direct strike by lightning (ultrahigh voltage, high current) has a very
high mortality. Current may flow up one leg and down the other,
producing an entry and exit wound. respiratory arrest is common.
Side flash (nearby lightning strike producing current that flows over the
surface of the victim) causes superficial burns.
Box 37. 7 British Burn Association criteria for transfer to
a burns centre
• Burn >10% TBSA (adult) or >5% TBSA (child), or full- thickness burn
>5% TBSA
• Burn to face, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum or major joints
• electrical and chemical burns
• Inhalational injury
• Circumferential burn to the limbs or chest
• Patients at extremes of age
• Patients with medical conditions which may complicate treatment


## 頁面 1040

MAjOr TrAUMA In CHILDren 1019
Major trauma in children
Paediatric major trauma encompasses a diverse and heterogeneous group
of pathologies and problems. Few health care professionals have clinical ex-
pertise exclusively in this area, making the team approach to the assessment
and management of children essential. This section provides an overview of
the management of major trauma in children, in particular focusing on the
differences from adult care.
Data from the UK’s Trauma Audit and research network88 show the
mean age of the most severely injured children is 6.5y, with a peak in
the 1st year of life and another after 6y of age. The most frequently re-
ported mechanisms were road traffic collisions (42%), falls (32%) and non-
accidental injury (10% in <2y). Of the most severely injured children, the
most frequently injured body part was the head (74%), followed by the
thorax (20%).
Catastrophic haemorrhage
Catastrophic haemorrhage is usually managed in the prehospital setting and
general principles apply such as direct pressure to active bleeding, use of
haemostatic dressings, pressure over proximal vessels or applications of
tourniquets when required. See Table 37.9 for a guide to sizing of chest
drains, catheters and nGTs, and Table 37.10 for normal systolic BP and Hr
dependent on age.
The estimated blood volume in children is dependent on age:
• 90– 100mL/ kg for premature infants
• 80– 90mL/k g for the term infant to 3mo
• 70mL/k g in children older than 3mo
• 65mL/k g in obese children.
(For information on maximum allowable blood loss calculation, see %
p. 906.)
Airway
(See % p. 900 for differences in assessment and management of the paedi-
atric airway.) In the context of major trauma, there is a high risk of airway
obstruction, particularly in significant head injury with reduced GCS or se-
vere multisystem trauma.
• Indications for intubation include:
• reduced GCS
• Significant chest injury resulting in impaired oxygenation
• To facilitate assessment and imaging such as CT or MrI in a distressed
or agitated child.
• Suggested rapid anaesthetic for paediatric trauma patients:
• Ketamine 1– 2mg/ kg ± fentanyl 1microgram/ kg, rocuronium 1mg/ kg
• Suxamethonium 1.5mg/ kg as an alternative (not in renal failure, burns
>12h, rhabdomyolysis or high spinal cord injuries).
• Continued sedation after intubation is typically with morphine and
midazolam (propofol can be used if sedation is for a short period only).
example regime: morphine 20– 80 micrograms/ kg/ h and midazolam
120– 360 micrograms/ kg/ h or propofol 2– 5mg/ kg/ h.


## 頁面 1041

0210
1020 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Table 37.9 Chest drain, nGT and urinary catheter size by weight
3– 5kg 6– 9kg 10– 11kg 12– 18kg 19– 22kg23– 30kg >30kg
Chest 10– 12Fr 12– 16Fr 16– 20Fr 20– 24Fr 24– 28Fr 28– 32Fr 32– 42Fr
drain
nGT 8– 10Fr 10Fr 10Fr 10– 12Fr 12Fr 12– 14Fr 14– 16Fr
Foley 6Fr 6Fr 6– 8Fr 8– 10Fr 10– 12Fr 12Fr 12– 14Fr
catheter
Table 37.10 normal vital signs in children
HR (bpm) Systolic BP (mmHg) RR (breaths/m in)
Preterm 120– 180 40– 60 50– 70
0– 1mo 100– 160 50– 70 35– 55
1– 12mo 80– 140 70– 100 30– 40
1– 3y 80– 130 70– 110 20– 30
3– 6y 80– 110 80– 110 20– 30
6– 12y 70– 100 80– 120 18– 24
12+y 60– 90 100– 120 14– 22
Cervical spine
C- spine injuries in children are rare, but when present, they more frequently
occur in the upper cervical spine (C1– 4) due to the relatively higher head-
to- body size ratio and higher fulcrum. With increasing age, the fulcrum
lowers and lower cervical spine injuries become more common. The spinal
skeleton is relatively mobile and can be significantly distracted without an
underlying spinal fracture; this leads to SCIWOrA. If plain X- rays or CT
scans do not reveal a bony injury, but the neurological exam is abnormal,
SCIWOrA should be suspected and imaging with MrI is required.
Immobilisation
The cervical spine must, wherever possible, be stabilised until a C-s pine
injury is ruled out.89
If attempts at immobilising the cervical spine are causing distress and agi-
tation, the risks and benefits of continued attempts must be assessed.
• In conscious children, use MILS whenever possible.
• In unconscious children or when MILS cannot be maintained,
immobilisation should be performed with a properly fitting collar, blocks
and tape.
• If no properly fitting collar is available, towels or blankets, etc. should be
used to improvise an immobilisation device.


## 頁面 1042

MAjOr TrAUMA In CHILDren 1021
Breathing and chest assessment
• In young children, the chest wall is soft and pliable. The ribs are aligned
horizontally and the intercostal muscles are weak. rib fractures are
much less common in children and, when present, represent significant
traumatic force. Tension pneumothoraces are poorly tolerated as
children develop hypoxia more rapidly than adults due to diminished
FrC and a higher metabolic rate.
• The management of significant chest injuries is the same as for adult
patients in many cases; the use of adequate analgesia and supplemental O
2
may be all that is needed. An intercostal drain must be considered in large
haemothoraces or pneumothoraces causing respiratory compromise or if
the patient is being placed on positive pressure ventilation.
Circulation
Children initially compensate very well for blood volume loss; tachycardia
and hypotension are late signs. Mild agitation, sweating and confusion may
all suggest impending circulatory collapse.
Abdominal assessment
Children have a relatively thin abdominal wall, a more horizontal diaphragm
and altered organ proportion and placement, and in infants, the bladder is
intra- abdominal. Therefore, the intra-a bdominal organs are more exposed
than in adults, rendering them more vulnerable to injury.
Visceral injuries are managed conservatively where possible, with sur-
gery reserved for those children who remain unstable despite aggressive
resuscitation.
Pelvis and long bones
Pelvic fractures are rare in children, but more likely in high-s peed road traffic
collisions with lateral side impact or pedestrian vs vehicle. An appropriately
sized pelvic binder, or a folded sheet, wrapped around the child at the level
of the greater trochanters (if a binder is unavailable) should be used for
haemorrhage control if there is a suspicion of pelvic injury.
Femoral injuries are relatively more common. When assessing the skel-
eton, the margins of the pelvis should be palpated gently, as should the full
length of the femurs, looking for swelling, tenderness, bruising and crepitus.
Managing haemorrhage
• IV access can be difficult in a child who is shocked and cold. If initial
attempts at peripheral IV access are unsuccessful and the child requires
immediate resuscitation, IO access should be gained, usually at either
the proximal tibia or the distal femur.
• If a child is actively bleeding, resuscitate with blood (consider O-
negative blood initially until X-m atched blood is available). Crystalloid
10mL/k g can be used initially, but this is not recommended if blood
is available. Balanced blood product resuscitation should be delivered
following the principles described in DCr (see % pp. 982–7). (See Table
37.11 for transfusion targets.)
• In haemorrhage, give IV tranexamic acid 15mg/ kg (max 1g) within 3h,
followed by a maintenance dose of 2mg/ kg/ h over the next 8h.90
• A transfusion of 40 mL/ kg of blood products within the first 24h
indicates a critically unwell child who is at i risk for early and
in- hospital death.


## 頁面 1043

0212
1022 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Table 37.11 Transfusion targets in children
Blood product Target Dosage
FFP 1:1 ratio with PrBCs 5– 20mL/ kg
For children born after 1996,
FFP is virally inactivated (e.g.
octaplasLG®)
Platelets ≥75 × 109/ L 10– 15mL/ kg
Cryoprecipitate Fibrinogen >1.5g/ L 10mL/ kg
Disability
Pupils should be assessed and a measure of consciousness, such as AVPU,
documented and repeatedly assessed.
Exposure and environment
Full exposure and examination of the child while limiting heat loss are crit-
ical. Underbody forced air warmers and paediatric fluid warmers with re-
duced dead space are useful.
Primary survey imaging
• Children are believed to be more sensitive to high doses of radiation
and this, together with a growing body of evidence suggesting a
relationship between exposure to ionising radiation and a risk of
developing malignancy, leads to a more conservative approach to
imaging, compared to adult patients. The ‘as low as reasonably
achievable’ principle leads to an imaging strategy built around judicious
use of plain films and targeted CT + MrI. (See Box 37.8 for a useful
framework for imaging of children in major trauma.)6,91
• Whole- body CT scan is still appropriate in children with severe injuries
or injuries affecting >1 body region, where the overall risks and benefits
have been carefully considered. Imaging should not be prioritised at the
expense of careful examination, observation and stabilisation.
Imaging guidelines
Indications for CT head within 1h of eD presentation for children sustaining
a head injury are as per adults (Box 37.8), but with a number of additional
indications:41
• Suspicion of non- accidental injury
• GCS <14 (<15 in under 1y) on initial eD assessment
• Tense fontanelle
• Children <1y with presence of bruise, swelling or laceration of >5cm
on the head
• More than one of the following:
• Loss of consciousness lasting >5min
• Abnormal drowsiness
• ≥3 discrete episodes of vomiting
• Dangerous mechanism of injury
• Amnesia (anterograde or retrograde) lasting >5min.
The royal College of radiologists suggests the following guidance as a deci-
sion tree for paediatric imaging.91


## 頁面 1044

MAjOr TrAUMA In CHILDren 1023
Box 37.8 When to perform imaging of the cervical spine
in children <16y
• Perform MrI for children if there is strong suspicion of cervical spinal
cord injury, as indicated by the Canadian C-spine rule and/o r clinical
assessment and/ or abnormal neurological signs or symptoms.
• Consider plain X-rays in children who do not fulfil the criteria for MrI
but clinical suspicion remains, and discuss the findings of the plain
X-rays with a consultant radiologist.
• For children who have sustained a head injury, perform CT cervical
spine if any of the following apply:
• GCS <13 on initial assessment
• The patient has been intubated
• Focal peripheral neurological signs
• Paraesthesiae in the upper or lower limbs
• Definitive diagnosis of C- spine injury is needed urgently
• Other areas scanned for head injury or multiregion trauma
• There is strong clinical suspicion despite normal X- rays
• Plain X-r ays are technically difficult or inadequate
• Plain X-r ays identify a significant bony injury.
Is the mechanism of injury consistent with major trauma?
• no: image as per clinical suspicion.
• yes: perform 1° survey and CXr; if the CXr suggests significant
intrathoracic injury, perform a CT thorax.
• yes, but suspicion of isolated C- spine injury only: C- spine plain films
normally enough to rule out bony injury.
Does the child meet NICE criteria for CT head?
• yes: request head and if there is suspicion of severe multisystem
trauma, consider C-s pine CT.
Is there severe multisystem trauma, a lap- belt injury, abdominal ecchymosis,
distension or tenderness, persistent hypovolaemia or PR/ NG bleeding?
• yes: abdominal CT (pelvic and abdominal X-r ays are not indicated in
paediatric trauma).
Concern of, or abnormal neurology consistent with, spinal injury?
• yes: request plain spinal films and MrI spine.
MrI is preferable in children due to the i incidence of SCIWOrA and
avoidance of ionising radiation.
The role of FAST
Generally, focused abdominal sonography in trauma (FAST) is not recom-
mended in paediatric trauma. The technique is operator-d ependent and
has only a modest sensitivity in detecting haemoperitoneum. If imaging is
needed, CT should be requested.


## 頁面 1045

0214
1024 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Paediatric cardiac arrest
The evidence around specific adjustments required to standard ALS in
children with traumatic cardiac arrest is limited.92 The mechanism of in-
jury helps predict possible injury patterns and potential reversible causes—
interventions should focus on the treatment of the underlying cause.
Thoracotomy should be considered if the skill exists within the team, for
appropriate cases, e.g. penetrating thoracic or abdominal trauma, where
intervention post- thoracotomy is more likely to be possible.
The adult traumatic cardiac arrest algorithm (see % Fig 37.1) is similar
to that for children, produced by Vassallo et al.92 The authors noted that
before assuming a traumatic cause of cardiac arrest in children, causes of
hypoxia, e.g. drowning, asphyxiation and impact apnoea, must be excluded.
Paediatric considerations for the trauma team
• Paediatric trauma covers a broad range of emotional intelligence, but
it is likely that the patient will be more anxious than an adult patient.
Accordingly, the trauma call should be adapted.
• rationalise the team. Paediatric trauma teams can be large and appear
daunting. Staff who are not immediately needed should be asked to
step away.
• Allocate one person to do the 1° survey and one person to be at the
head end, talking to and calming the child.
• encourage the parents to be present and visible. They should also have
a chaperone explaining what is happening.
Safeguarding
A child presenting to hospital as a major trauma call can be considered a
red flag for potential safeguarding issues. rarely, the trauma call may be
due to non- accidental injury, but more often injuries result from neglect or
wider social stressors within a family. Older children and adolescents may
become injured because of their own risk-t aking behaviour or peer group
behaviours.
All children presenting to trauma services should have these issues ex-
plored and local safeguarding services should be involved in their care.
Where necessary, concerns will need to be escalated beyond the local
system.
Analgesia in paediatric trauma
(See % p. 926 for further detail on analgesia for children.) One of the
biggest contributors to fear in paediatric trauma patients is pain, and this
should be addressed early on in the patient journey. If surgery or imminent
intubation is thought to be likely, then oral medications should be avoided.
Suggested strategies include:
• Paracetamol (IV)
• entonox® in older, awake patients
• Intranasal or IV opioids (diamorphine or fentanyl)
• Ketamine 250– 300 micrograms/ kg IM, IV, PO
• Morphine IV 50– 200 micrograms/ kg (max 10mg).


## 頁面 1046

SILVer TrAUMA 1025
Silver trauma
‘Silver trauma’ generally describes trauma in patients ≥60y. A fall from
standing is the commonest mechanism, and the commonest injury is a frac-
tured neck of femur. However, rib and fragility fractures, head injury and
major haemorrhage are also commonly seen.
Frailty, lack of physiological reserve, sarcopenia, comorbid disease and
medication all impact on the type and severity of traumatic injuries and
their presentation.93,94,95,96 Older people are at significant risk of losing their
pretrauma level of function. Improving outcomes and the process of re-
enablement begins at triage. The Trauma Audit and research network
(TArn) data consistently show that elderly patients are undertriaged, as-
sessed by more junior team members, may be denied interventions and
face delays to treatment and transfer to trauma centres.97 Use of compre-
hensive geriatric assessment and frailty screening tools is recommended to
facilitate more informed early decision- making in older trauma patients.98
The falls history
‘A mechanical fall’ is commonly documented as the mechanism of injury in
silver trauma. This overlooks an important consideration: what precipitated
the fall? Assessment, examination and investigation of these patients should
aim to determine both the reason for the fall, the trauma caused by the fall
and any associated injuries (e.g. burns, rhabdomyolysis caused by periods of
immobility)— the input of orthogeriatricians is invaluable. establishing the
cause of the fall can be aided by the following sieve:
• Cardiac: chest pain, new breathlessness, collapse on exercise?
• neurological: preceding loss of consciousness? Symptoms of CVe,
headache, seizures?
• Drug- related: alcohol, medication changes?
• Orthostatic: PD, DM, bleeding, sepsis, medication?
• environment: ill-fi tting shoes, postprandial or post-m icturition,
emotional state?
Emergency assessment
The salient differences in injury and physiological patterns are summarised
below. Be mindful that major life-c hanging injuries to the head, neck and
chest can result from low- energy falls from standing.
Airway with C- spine control
Can be compromised or complicated by lack of, or displaced, dentures and
restrictions in neck movement due to arthritic or spondylytic changes.
• Presence of severe degenerative disease of the cervical spine puts
elderly patients at risk of worsening neurological outcome with poorly
fitting hard collars. Padding and tape may be more appropriate and help
avoid hyperextended positions and pressure sores.99
• Upper C- spine injuries are more common.
• Degenerative disease makes spinal contusion and central cord
syndrome more likely and interpretation of images more difficult.100
• Have a low threshold for C- spine imaging. nICe guidance indicates that
even without signs or symptoms of cervical spine injury, if there is the
potential for C- spine injury in a person >65y, then a CT head should be
performed.6 If there is a head or face injury, think neck injury too. If CT
head is indicated, so is CT cervical spine.


## 頁面 1047

0216
1026 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Breathing
Multiple rib fractures, flail segments and haemo-/ pneumothoraces may re-
sult from simple falls.
Chronic lung disease and reduced muscle mass may impair the patient’s
ability to increase respiratory effort, making d pO and i pCO more likely.
2 2
Circulation
• Anticoagulation for cardiac and vascular disease is common in the ‘silver
trauma’ patient, turning what may have been a small haemorrhage into
a major haemorrhage. Anticoagulant and antiplatelet history should be
specifically sought for all patients. POCT of coagulation and platelet
function (e.g. TeG® or rOTeM®) can be useful. Where bleeding is
suspected, reversal of anticoagulation should be initiated promptly if
possible (see % p. 272).
• Hypertension is common, so physiological parameters for activation
of major haemorrhage protocols should be adjusted. Systolic BP
<110mmHg and/ or a pulse of >90bpm should raise suspicion of
hypovolaemia/ haemorrhage. β- blocker use prevents/ reduces the
tachycardia response to hypovolaemia, which can reduce clinical
suspicion of haemorrhage and also reduce the physiological method by
which cardiac output and tissue perfusion are maintained.
• Invasive monitoring and repeated measurement of lactate and base
deficit help guide resuscitation. Base deficit changes more acutely,
whereas lactate can lag behind the clinical picture.
Neurological assessment
• Cerebral atrophy increases the relative skull vault space such that
significant intracranial bleeding may go unnoticed, without an initial
decrease in GCS. repeat re- evaluation and a low threshold for CT head
are necessary.
• Patients on antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications with a head injury
and a normal initial CT head may require a repeat scan.
Temperature
• elderly patients have reduced metabolism and muscle mass and are
often discovered, having fallen some time ago, lying on the floor. These
considerations render them more susceptible to hypothermia. Active
warming begins in the eD and should continue until the patient is
normothermic.
Electrolyte disturbance
• elderly patients are more likely to have deranged electrolytes due to
comorbidities (e.g. CKD) or medicines (e.g. diuretics).
Analgesia
Undertreated pain is a significant cause of delirium, so timely assessment
and provision of multimodal analgesia are especially important in this at-r isk
group. nSAIDs are relatively contraindicated. Conversely, opioids can also
cause delirium; regular oxycodone is preferred over morphine because it
has better oral bioavailability and no active metabolites and does not ac-
cumulate in renal impairment. Laxatives should be co-p rescribed. regional
anaesthesia (single shot or via catheters), where suitable, is ideal for redu-
cing opioid needs.


## 頁面 1048

SILVer TrAUMA 1027
Delirium
Delirium is a disorder in which there is an acute confusional state, usually
with a fluctuating course, characterised by disturbed consciousness, cog-
nitive function or perception. In older people, especially those with pre-
existing cognitive impairment, it is usual to find several factors contributing
to delirium.101
The ‘PInCH Me’102 mnemonic (Table 37.12) is a useful aide memoire
to use when reviewing patients, in order to screen for and treat causes
of delirium. The 4AT103 (M https:// www.the4at.com) is a validated tool
that quickly and easily detects delirium in routine clinical practice. Patients
should be given their usual visual and auditory aids to allow them to engage
with their environment as soon as possible.
Table 37.12 risk factors for delirium
Risk factors
P Pain Fractures and injuries
In Infection Skin and chest wall injuries, surgical site
C Constipation Opioids and immobility
H Hydration nil by mouth, unable to reach drinks or hold cups,
delirium
M Medication Polypharmacy and alcohol or substance withdrawal
E Electrolytes Glucose, na+ and K+ derangement
Anaesthesia and surgery
• Time in theatre and under anaesthesia is a tiny proportion of the overall
hospital journey, but its conduct can significantly impact remobilisation,
re- enablement and rehabilitation.
• Ceilings of care/ DnAr orders and their adaptation in the perioperative
period should be discussed with the patient and multidisciplinary team.
The reSPeCT tool may aid this.95
• Providing a homeostatic anaesthetic is of key importance. Proactively
maintain a systolic BP within 20% of normal104 and a MAP of
≥65mmHg.105 A vasopressor infusion is ideal for this (but ensure
euvolaemia).
• Consider inhalational induction or co- induction and use age- adjusted
MAC ± depth of anaesthesia monitoring.
• Limit LA dose in spinal anaesthesia (e.g. hip fractures, ≤2mL of 0.5%
heavy/ plain bupivacaine) and avoid adjunctive opioids, or at most
restrict to 20 micrograms of fentanyl.
• Maintain Hb around 90– 100g/ L.106,107
• regional anaesthesia improves analgesia, reduces opioid requirement
and reduces delirium.
• Avoid ‘deliriogenic’ drugs, e.g. ketamine, cyclizine, atropine, midazolam.
For sedation, propofol as a TCI has a better side-effect profile
compared to midazolam.
• POCT should be employed to direct transfusion and fluid requirements
in theatre and on the ward.


## 頁面 1049

0218
1028 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
Recovery
Surgery care bundles are helpful in silver trauma patients. These prompt
consideration of common issues during recovery and the inpatient stay, and
provide appropriate parameters for early warning scores (e.g. BP, Hr, Hb).
Elder abuse
Can take many forms, e.g. physical, financial, sexual, neglect, emotional and
discriminatory. Be vigilant for the signs and if suspected, adhere to local
reporting mechanisms.
References
1 Moran CG, Lecky F, Bouamra O, et al. (2018). Changing the system—m ajor trauma patients and
their outcomes in the nHS (england) 2008– 17. EClinicalMedicine, 2, 13– 21.
2 Slope r (2017). Exploration of handover communication in military and NHS emergency care settings
[thesis]. Southampton: University of Southampton. M https:// eprints.soton.ac.uk/ 422197/ 1/
Final_ Thesis.pdf
3 national Institute for Health and Care excellence (2016). Major trauma: assessment and initial
management. nICe guideline [nG39]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng39
4 Mountain Al, Goode P, Thies K-C (2018). European Trauma Course: the team approach, 4th edn.
european resuscitation Council.
5 American College of Surgeons (2018). Advanced Trauma Life Support®: student course manual,
10th edn. Chicago, IL: American College of Surgeons.
6 national Institute for Health and Care excellence (2016). Spinal injury: assessment and initial man-
agement. nICe guideline [nG41]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ ng41
7 Austin n, Krishnamoorthy V, Dagal A (2014). Airway management in cervical spine injury. Int J
Crit Illn Inj Sci, 4, 50– 6.
8 Iqbal Hj, Alsousou j, Shah S, et al. (2018). early surgical stabilization of complex chest wall injuries
improves short- term patient outcomes. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 100, 1298– 308.
9 Mutschler M, Paffrath T, Wolfl C, et al. (2014). The ATLS® classification of hypovolaemic shock:
a well established teaching tool on the edge? Injury Int J Care Injured, 45S, S35– 8.
10 Koch e, Lovett S, nghiem T, et al. (2019). Shock index in the emergency department: utility and
limitations. Open Access Emerg Med, 11, 179– 99.
11 Spahn Dr, Bouillon B, Cerny V, et al. (2019). The european guideline on management of major
bleeding and coagulopathy following trauma: fifth edition. Crit Care, 23, 98.
12 national Blood Authority Australia (2009). Patient blood management guidelines: module 1, critical
bleeding/ massive transfusion. M https:// www.blood.gov.au/ pbm- module- 1
13 Harris T, rhys Thomas GO, Brohi K (2012). early fluid resuscitation in severe trauma. BMJ,
345, e5752.
14 Picetti e, rossi S, Abu-Z idan FM, et al. (2019). WSeS consensus conference guidelines: moni-
toring and management of severe adult traumatic brain injury patients with polytrauma in the
first 24 hours. World J Emerg Surg, 14, 53.
15 Harris T, Davenport r, Mak M, et al. (2018). The evolving science of trauma resuscitation. Emerg
Med Clin North Am, 36, 85– 106.
16 Huber- Wagner S, Biberthaler P, Häberle S, et al. (2013). Whole-b ody CT in haemodynamically
unstable severely injured patients— a retrospective, multicentre study. PLoS One, 8, e68880
17 Holcomb jB, Tilley BC, Baraniuk S, et al. (2015). Transfusion of plasma, platelets, and red blood
cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2 ratio and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PrOPPr random-
ized clinical trial. JAMA, 313, 471– 82.
18 Hunt B, Allard S, Keeling D, et al. (2015). A practical guideline for the haematological manage-
ment of major haemorrhage. Br J Haematol, 170, 788– 803.
19 The CrASH- 3 trial collaborators (2019). effects of tranexamic acid on death, disability, vascular
occlusive events and other morbidities in patients with acute traumatic brain injury (CrASH- 3):
a randomised, placebo- controlled trial. Lancet, 394, 1713– 23.
20 netherton S, Milenkovic V, Taylor M, Davis Pj (2019). Diagnostic accuracy of eFAST in the
trauma patient: a systematic review and meta-a nalysis. CJEM, 21, 727– 38.
21 The royal College of radiologists (2015). Standards of practice and guidance for
trauma radiology in severely injured patients. M https:// www.rcr.ac.uk/ publication/
standards- practice- and- guidance- trauma- radiology- severely- injured- patients- second


## 頁面 1050

SILVer TrAUMA 1029
22 Lamb CM, MacGoey P, navarro AP, et al. (2014). Damage control surgery in the era of damage
control resuscitation. Br J Anaesth, 113, 242– 9.
23 rotondo MF, Schwab CW, McGonigal MD, et al. (1993). ‘Damage control’: an approach for im-
proved survival in exsanguinating penetrating abdominal injury. J Trauma, 35, 375– 83.
24 joint United Kingdom (UK) Blood Transfusion and Tissue Transplantation Services Professional
Advisory Committee (2013). Section 4.13: Transfusion of blood components. In: norfolk D
(ed). Handbook of Transfusion Medicine, 5th edn. London: The Stationary Office.
25 Shoemaker WC, Peitzman AB, Bellamy r, et al. (1996). resuscitation from severe hemorrhage.
Crit Care Med, 24, S12– 23.
26 Bickell WH, Wall Mj jr, Pepe Pe, et al. (1994). Immediate versus delayed fluid resuscitation for
hypotensive patients with penetrating torso injuries. N Engl J Med, 331, 1105– 9.
27 Doran CM, Doran CA, Woolley T, et al. (2012). Targeted resuscitation improves coagulation and
outcome. J Trauma Acute Care Surg, 72, 835– 43.
28 Imperial College Hospitals nHS Trust (2015). Rapid resuscitation transit: pa-
tient pathway. M https:// smh- gas.org.uk/ wp- content/ uploads/ 2016/ 10/
rapid- resuscitation- Transit- FInAL- jAn15- 2.pdf
29 Paterson- Brown S, Howell C (2016). Managing Obstetric Emergencies and Trauma: The MOET
Course Manual, 3rd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
30 jain V, Chari r, Maslovitz S, et al. (2015). Guidelines for the management of a pregnant trauma
patient. J Obstet Gynaecol Can, 37, 553– 71.
31 Greco PS, Day Lj, Pearlman MD (2019). Guidance for evaluation and management of blunt ab-
dominal trauma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol, 134, 1343– 57.
32 [no authors listed] (2000). The Brain Trauma Foundation. The American Association of
neurological Surgeons joint Section on neurotrauma and Critical Care. early indicators of prog-
nosis in severe traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma, 17, 449– 627.
33 Manley G, Knudson MM, Morabito D, et al. (2001). Hypotension, hypoxia, and head injury: fre-
quency, duration, and consequences. Arch Surg, 136, 1118– 23.
34 Carney n, Totten AM, O’reilly C, et al. (2017). Guidelines for the management of severe trau-
matic brain injury, fourth edition. Neurosurgery, 80, 6– 15.
35 nathanson MH, Andrzejowski j, Dinsmore j, et al. (2020). Guidelines for safe transfer of the
brain injured patient: trauma and stroke, 2019. Anaesthesia, 75, 234– 46.
36 Arora S, Singh PM, Trikha A (2014). Ventilatory strategies in trauma patients. J Emerg Trauma
Shock, 7, 25– 31.
37 Asehnoune K, roquilly A, Cinotti r (2018). respiratory management in patients with severe
brain injury. Crit Care, 22, 76.
38 Andrews Pj, Sinclair HL, rodriguez A, et al. (2015). Hypothermia for intracranial hypertension
after traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med, 373, 2403– 12.
39 Chen jW, Gombart Zj, rogers S, et al. (2011). Pupillary reactivity as an early indicator of in-
creased intracranial pressure: the introduction of the neurological pupil index. Surg Neurol
Int, 2, 82.
40 Kalamar AF, Van Aken j, Caemaert j, et al. (2005). Value of Cushing reflex as a warning sign for
brain ischaemia during neuroendoscopy. Br J Anaesth, 94, 791– 9.
41 national Institute for Health and Care excellence (2019). Head injury: assessment and early man-
agement. Clinical guideline [CG176]. M https:// www.nice.org.uk/ guidance/ cg176
42 Intensive Care Society (2019). Guidance on: the transfer of the critically ill adult. M https:// www.
ficm.ac.uk/ sites/ default/ files/ transfer_ critically_ ill_ adult_ 2019.pdf
43 Harris T, rice S, Watts B, et al. (2010). The emergency control of traumatic maxillofacial haem-
orrhage. Eur J Emerg Med, 17, 230– 3.
44 Association of Ambulance Chief executives (2017). Thoracic trauma: pathophysiology. Thoracic
trauma guideline. M https:// aace.org.uk/ jrcalc- updates- 2016/ thoracic- trauma- pathophysiology
45 Bulger eM, Arneson MA, Mock Cn, et al. (2000). rib fractures in the elderly. J Trauma, 48,
1040– 6.
46 Pape HC, remmers D, rice j, et al. (2000). Appraisal of early evaluation of blunt chest trauma:
development of a standardized scoring system for initial clinical decision making. J Trauma, 49,
496– 504.
47 Battle C, Hutchings H, Lovett S, et al. (2014). Predicting outcomes after blunt chest wall trauma:
development and external validation of a new prognostic model. Crit Care, 18, r98.
48 Brewer B, Zarzaur BL (2015). Cardiac contusions. Curr Trauma Rep, 1, 232– 6.
49 Igiebor OS, Waseem M (last updated 2021). Aortic trauma. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls
Publishing. M https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ books/ nBK459337


## 頁面 1051

0310
1030 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
50 neschis DG (updated 2019). Management of blunt thoracic aortic injury. M https:// www.
uptodate.com/ contents/ management- of- blunt- thoracic- aortic- injury
51 Fox n, Schwartz D, Salazar j, et al. (2015). evaluation and management of blunt traumatic aortic
injury: a practice management guideline from the eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma.
J Trauma Acute Care Surg, 78, 136– 46.
52 Wahed S, Dent B, jones r, et al. (2013). Spectrum of oesophageal perforations and their influ-
ence on management. Br J Surg, 101, e156– 62.
53 Altinok T, Can A (2014). Management of tracheobronchial injuries. Eurasian J Med, 46, 209– 15.
54 Kiser AC, O’Brien SM, Detterbeck FC (2001). Blunt tracheobronchial injuries: treatment and
outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg, 71, 2059– 65.
55 Oyeniyi BT, Fox ee, Scerbo MH, et al. (2017). Trends in 1029 trauma deaths at a level 1 trauma
center: impact of a bleeding control bundle of care. Injury, 48, 5– 12.
56 Ierardi M, Duka e, Lucchina n, et al. (2016). The role of interventional radiology in
abdominopelvic trauma. Br J Radiol, 89, 20150866.
57 Ozkan OV, justin V, Fingerhut A, et al. (2016). Laparoscopy in abdominal trauma. Curr Trauma
Rep, 2, 238– 46.
58 Martin Mj, Brown CVr, Shatz DV, et al. (2018). evaluation and management of abdominal stab
wounds: a Western Trauma Association critical decisions algorithm. J Trauma Acute Care Surg, 85,
1007– 15.
59 Srikanth S, Gumbert SD, Stephens C, et al. (2017). resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion
of the aorta: principles, initial clinical experience, and considerations for the anesthesiologist.
Anesth Analg, 125, 884– 90.
60 Bekdache O, Paradis T, Shen yB, et al. (2019). resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of
the aorta (reBOA): indications: advantages and challenges of implementation in traumatic non-
compressible torso hemorrhage. Trauma Surg Acute Care Open, 4, e000262.
61 Skitch S, engels P (2018). Acute management of the traumatically injured pelvis. Emerg Med Clin
N Am, 36, 161– 79.
62 Hachem LD, Ahuja CS, Fehlings MG (2017). Assessment and management of acute spinal cord
injury: from point of injury to rehabilitation. j Spinal Cord Med, 40, 665–7 5.
63 Alizadeh A, Dyck SM, Karimi-A bdolrezaee S (2019). Traumatic spinal cord injury: an overview of
pathophysiology, models and acute injury mechanisms. Front Neurol, 10, 282.
64 World Health Organization (2013). Spinal cord injury. M https:// www.who.int/ news- room/
fact- sheets/ detail/ spinal- cord- injury
65 Lee Dy, Park yj, Song Sy, et al. (2018). The importance of early surgical decompression for acute
traumatic spinal cord injury. Clin Orthop Surg, 10, 448– 54.
66 Ihalainen T, rinta- Kiikka I, Luoto T, et al. (2017). Traumatic cervical spinal cord injury: a pro-
spective clinical study of laryngeal penetration and aspiration. Spinal Cord, 55, 979– 84.
67 Squair j, Bélanger LM, Tsang A, et al. (2019). empirical targets for acute hemodynamic manage-
ment of individuals with spinal cord injury. Neurology, 93, e1205– 11.
68 Kwasnicki rM, Din AH, Hettiaratchy S (2018). The use of pulse oximetry to diagnose limb is-
chaemia. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg, 71, 1816– 34.
69 British Orthopaedic Association, British Association of Plastic, reconstructive and
Aesthetic Surgeons Audit Standards for Trauma (2017). Open fractures. M https:// www.
boa.ac.uk/ uploads/ assets/ 3b91ad0a- 9081- 4253- 92f7d90e8df0fb2c/ 29bf80f1- 1cb6- 46b7-
afc761119341447f/ open%20fractures.pdf
70 Castillo rC, MacKenzie ej, Wegener ST, et al. (2006). Prevalence of chronic pain seven years
following limb threatening lower extremity trauma. Pain, 124, 321– 9.
71 elazab A, Abd- elgawad A, Attia M (2018). Peripheral nerve block: does it affect pain perception
in acute compartment syndrome? A systematic review. Ortho Rheumatol Open Access J, 12, 1– 6.
72 Klucka j, Stourac P, Stouracova A, et al. (2017). Compartment syndrome and regional anaes-
thesia: critical review. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub, 161, 242– 51.
73 British Orthopaedic Association Standards for Trauma (2014). Diagnosis and management of
compartment syndrome of the limbs. M https:// www.boa.ac.uk/ uploads/ assets/ 0d37694f- 1cad-
40d5- b4c1032eef7486ff/ de4cfbe1- 6ef3- 443d- a7f2a0ee491d2229/ diagnosis%20and%20man-
agement%20of%20compartment%20syndrome%20of%20the%20limbs.pdf
74 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013). Explosions and blast injuries: a primer for clin-
icians. M https:// www.cdc.gov/ masstrauma/ preparedness/ primer.pdf
75 Mackenzie I, Tunnicliffe B, Clasper j, et al. (2013). What the intensive care doctor needs to know
about blast- related lung injury. J Intensive Care Soc, 14, 303– 12.


## 頁面 1052

SILVer TrAUMA 1031
76 nHS england (2020). Clinical guidelines for major incidents or mass cas-
ualty events. Version 2. M https:// www.england.nhs.uk/ publication/
clinical- guidelines- for- major- incidents- and- mass- casualty- events
77 Slessor D, Hunter S (2015). To be blunt: are we wasting our time? emergency department thora-
cotomy following blunt trauma: a systematic review and meta-a nalysis. Ann Emerg Med, 65, 297–
307.e16.
78 Wise D, Davies G, Coats T, et al. (2005). emergency thoracotomy: ‘how to do it’. Emerg Med J,
22, 22– 4.
79 Kalson nS, jenks T, Woodford M, et al. (2012). Burns represent a significant proportion of the
total serious trauma workload in england and Wales. Burns, 38, 330– 9.
80 Battaloglu e, Greasley L, Leon- Villapalos j, young A, Porter K (2019). Faculty of Pre- Hospital Care
and British Burn Association expert consensus meeting. Management of burns in pre-h ospital trauma
care. M https:// fphc.rcsed.ac.uk/ media/ 2621/ burns- consensus- 2019.pdf
81 Holst j, Sauaia A, Ivashchenko A, et al. (2015). Indications for intubation of the patient with
thermal and inhalational burns. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 201, A1619.
82 O’Driscoll Br, Howard LS, Davison AG (2008). BTS guideline for emergency oxygen use in adult
patients. Thorax, 63 (Suppl 6), vi1– 68.
83 Venter TH, Karpelowsky jS, rode H (2007). Cooling of the burn wound: the ideal temperature
of the coolant. Burns, 33, 917– 22.
84 rajan V, Bartlett n, Harvey jG, et al. (2009). Delayed cooling of an acute scald contact burn injury
in a porcine model: is it worthwhile? J Burn Care Res, 30, 729– 34.
85 Hostler D, Weaver MD, Ziembicki jA, et al. (2013). Admission temperature and survival in pa-
tients admitted to burn centers. J Burn Care Res, 34, 498– 506.
86 Middleton PM, Simpson PM, Sinclair G, et al. (2010). effectiveness of morphine, fentanyl, and
methoxyflurane in the prehospital setting. Prehosp Emerg Care, 14, 439– 47.
87 nHS england (2018). Clinical commissioning policy: hyperbaric oxygen therapy for carbon monoxide
poisoning (all ages). nHS england reference: 170048P. M https:// www.england.nhs.uk/ wp-
content/ uploads/ 2018/ 07/ hbot- for- carbon- monoxide- poisoning- v2.pdf
88 The TArnlet Committee. The Trauma Audit and research network, england and Wales. 2
years of severe injury in children. January 2013–D ecember 2014. M https:// www.tarn.ac.uk/
Content/ Childrensreport2/ files/ assets/ common/ downloads/ TArn%20Leaflet.pdf
89 The royal College of emergency Medicine (2017). Position statement: paediatric trauma—
stabilisation of the cervical spine. M https:// www.rcem.ac.uk/ docs/ rCeM%20Guidance/
Paediatric%20Trauma%20- %20Stabilisation%20of%20the%20Cervical%20Spine%20(Aug%20
2017).pdf
90 royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (2012). Evidence statement: major trauma and the
use of tranexamic acid in children. M https:// www.rcem.ac.uk/ docs/ external%20Guidance/
10k.%20Major%20trauma%20and%20the%20use%20of%20tranexamic%20acid%20in%20chil-
dren%20evidence%20statement%20(rCPCH,%20nov%202012).pdf
91 The royal College of radiologists (2014). Paediatric trauma protocols. BFCr(14)8. M https://
www.rcr.ac.uk/ system/ files/ publication/ field_ publication_ files/ BFCr%2814%298_ paeds_
trauma.pdf
92 Vassallo j, nutbeam T, rickard AC, et al. (2018). Paediatric traumatic cardiac arrest: the develop-
ment of an algorithm to guide recognition, management and decisions to terminate resuscitation.
Emerg Med J, 35, 669– 74.
93 Hazeldine j, Lord jM, Hampson P (2015). Immunesenescence and inflammaging: a contributory
factor in the poor outcome of the geriatric trauma patient. Ageing Res Rev, 24, 349– 57.
94 Kingston A, robinson L, Booth H, et al. (2018). Projections of multi-m orbidity in the older popu-
lation in england to 2035: estimates from the Population Ageing and Care Simulation (PACSim)
model. Age Ageing, 47, 374– 80.
95 resuscitation Council UK. ReSPECT for healthcare professionals. M https:// www.resus.org.uk/
respect/ respect- healthcare- professionals
96 Antunes AC, Araújo DA, Veríssimo MT, et al. (2017). Sarcopenia and hospitalisation costs in
older adults: a cross- sectional study. Nutr Diet, 74, 46– 50.
97 The Trauma Audit and research network (TArn) (2017). Major trauma in older people. M
https:// www.tarn.ac.uk/ content/ downloads/ 3793/ Major%20Trauma%20in%20Older%20
People%202017.pdf
98 royal College of Anaesthetists (2020). Chapter 16: Guidelines for the provision of anaesthesia
services for trauma and orthopaedic surgery 2020. London: royal College of Anaesthetists.
99 London Major Trauma System (2018). Management of elderly major trauma patients, 2nd edn.
London: London Operational Delivery networks.


## 頁面 1053

0312
1032 CHAPTer 37 The major trauma patient
100 Fassett Dr, Harrop jS, Maltenfort M, et al. (2007). Mortality rates in geriatric patients with
spinal cord injuries. J Neurosurg Spine, 7, 277– 81.
101 British Geriatric Society (2019). Comprehensive geriatric assessment toolkit for primary care practi-
tioners. London: British Geriatric Society.
102 raven D (2014). HECTOR. The Heartlands’ elderly care trauma and ongoing recovery programme
course manual. M https:// www.embeds.co.uk/ wp- content/ uploads/ 2019/ 10/ Hector-
manual.pdf
103 Saller T, MacLullich AMj, Perneczky r (2020). The 4AT—a n instrument for delirium detection
for older patients in the post- anaesthesia care unit. Anaesthesia, 75, 410.
104 Griffiths r, Beech F, Brown A, et al. (2014). AAGBI working party: peri-o perative care of the
elderly 2014. Anaesthesia, 69 (Suppl 1), 81– 98.
105 Salmasi V, Maheshwari K, yang D, et al. (2017). relationship between intraoperative hypo-
tension, defined by either reduction from baseline or absolute thresholds, and acute kidney
and myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery: a retrospective cohort analysis. Anesthesiology,
126, 47– 65.
106 Hovaguimian F, Myles PS (2016). restrictive versus liberal transfusion strategy in the periopera-
tive and acute care settings: a context-s pecific systematic review and meta-a nalysis of random-
ized controlled trials. Anesthesiology, 25, 46– 61.
107 Docherty AB, O’Donnell r, Brunskill S, et al. (2016). effect of restrictive versus liberal trans-
fusion strategies on outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease in a non-c ardiac surgery
setting: systematic review and meta- analysis. BMJ, 352, i1351.

