# 急診麻醉

## Chapter 38: The emergency patient

*Source: book2.pdf, pages 1054-1071*

---


## 頁面 1054

Chapter 38 1033
The emergency patient
Shardha Chandrasekharan, Ravi Mistry and
Daniel Frei
Tracheal intubation of critically ill adults 1034
Sepsis and septic shock 1035
Emergency laparotomy 1040
The ICU patient going to theatre 1044
Transferring the critically ill 1046


## 頁面 1055

0314
1034 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
Tracheal intubation of critically ill adults
(See also % pp. 368–9 and % p. 373–8.) (See Fig. 38.1.)
Fig. 38.1 Tracheal intubation of critically ill adults. reproduced from Difficult airway
Society 2015 guidelines for management of unanticipated difficult intubation in adults. Difficult
airway Society intubation guidelines working group, BJA, 115(6): 827– 48 (2015) doi:10.1093/
bja/ aev371. permission for the use of these algorithms for commercial purposes must be sought
directly from Difficult airway Society as they hold the copyrights.


## 頁面 1056

SEpSIS anD SEpTIC ShoCk 1035
Sepsis and septic shock
Definitions
• The current definition of sepsis is life- threatening organ dysfunction
due to a dysregulated host response. historic distinctions between a
systemic inflammatory response and infection have been removed.1
• qSoFa is used as a rapid clinical screen for sepsis; >2 of the following
are required:
• hypotension (SBp <100mmhg)
• altered mental status (GCS <15)
• Tachypnoea (rr >22 breaths/ min).
• Septic shock is defined as the presence of sepsis with hypotension
requiring vasopressors to achieve a Map >65mmhg and lactate
>2mmol/ L despite adequate fluid resuscitation.
• Even with vigilance and treatment, sepsis and septic shock carry a high
mortality.
Pathology
• The response to sepsis is complex and involves many pro- and anti-
inflammatory mediators. The severity of illness is determined more by
the nature of the individual inflammatory response than by the infection.
• pathological effects caused by these mediators include vasodilation,
impairment of the glycocalyx, capillary permeability, impaired tissue o
2
utilisation and septic cardiomyopathy.
• Tissues may become hypoxic for several reasons, including hypotension
(vasodilation, hypovolaemia, myocardial depression), microvascular
thrombosis (activation of coagulation), tissue oedema (acting as a
barrier to o diffusion) and shunting past some capillary beds. hypoxia
2
drives anaerobic metabolism and lactic acidosis and may occur despite
adequate o delivery, due to mitochondrial dysfunction. reperfusion
2
of previously hypoxic tissues can cause further release of damaging
reactive o species.
2
Resuscitation
• The resuscitation of a septic patient is started as soon as the condition
is recognised. International guidelines for the treatment of sepsis and
septic shock are frequently updated.2 Current goals within the 1st hour
of resuscitation are:3
• To measure lactate (and remeasure if initial lactate is >2mmol/L )
• To obtain blood cultures before administering antibiotics
• To administer broad- spectrum antibiotics, guided by local
microbiology policies
• rapid administration of 30mL/ kg crystalloid for hypotension or
lactate levels of >4mmol/ L. Caution in patients with LV failure and
consider need for fluid warming.
• administer vasopressors to achieve a Map >65mmhg if hypotension
persists after fluid resuscitation.
• Induction of anaesthesia in the septic patient is hazardous, and every
effort should be made to resuscitate the patient preoperatively.
however, this must be balanced against the urgency of the surgery and
the need for source control. Surgical source control may initially worsen
the clinical state by precipitating a septic shower or haemorrhage.


## 頁面 1057

0316
1036 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
• Establish vascular access and monitoring as soon as possible and before
induction of anaesthesia:
• Secure large-b ore IV cannulae
• arterial line
• Urinary catheter (can be done post- induction)
• CVp line if a need for centrally administered vasoactives/i notropes/
parenteral nutrition is anticipated (can be performed post-i nduction)
• In the presence of advanced sepsis, consider non-i nvasive Co
monitoring using the preferred local method.
• preoxygenate patients with 100% o to increase Spo, ideally >92%4
2 2
prior to induction.
• a higher Map target may be appropriate in those with akI and a
background of hypertension.5
• Ensure blood is available— maintain hb >70g/ L. a higher transfusion
threshold may be needed in acute haemorrhage. Transfusion should be
balanced with factor replacement and utilisation of adjuncts (calcium,
warming to normothermia, tranexamic acid) (see % p. 454).
• Consider IV hydrocortisone (50mg 6- hourly) if hypotension remains
poorly responsive to adequate fluid resuscitation and vasopressors.6,7
• If the patient requires high- level postoperative monitoring or support,
discuss with critical care staff.
Interpretation of investigations in the septic patient
• FBC: expect a high WCC with neutrophilia, although a low WCC may
be evidence of overwhelming sepsis. a low platelet count is common
due to septic coagulopathy and thrombocytosis is also common in
sepsis.
• U&E: elevated creatinine indicates akI and an elevated urea:creatinine
ratio may indicate dehydration.
• Coagulation: non- iatrogenic i Inr suggests septic coagulopathy.
• Blood glucose: stress- induced hyperglycaemia is common and might be
exacerbated by catecholamines (classically adrenaline). Low glucose is
concerning and supports the presence of advanced sepsis or hepatic
dysfunction.
• aBGs:
• Metabolic acidosis; early respiratory compensation may not be
maintained as the patient becomes obtunded.
• hypoxia is multifactorial and common.
• high-a nion gap metabolic acidosis may be due to tissue
hypoperfusion and hyperlactatemia, but other causes include blood
ketones due to diabetic ketoacidosis, accumulation of toxins/d rugs
(i.e. metformin) and akI. Lactate will also rise due to catecholamines,
particularly adrenaline. If a normal- anion gap metabolic acidosis is
present, consider common causes such as excessive 0.9% sodium
chloride administration (chloride will be high) or GI bicarbonate loss.
• The CXr may show evidence of non- cardiogenic pulmonary oedema,
indicating the development of arDS. The pao:Fio ratio can used to
2 2
determine the onset and severity of arDS.8


## 頁面 1058

SEpSIS anD SEpTIC ShoCk 1037
Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
• d anaesthetic, sedative and opioid dose usually required. Carefully
titrated induction drugs will achieve greater CVS stability, but the risk of
aspiration may necessitate a more rapid administration of medication
(rSI). The use of ketamine 1– 2mg/ kg IV is increasingly popular as
an induction drug in the critically ill. although cardiovascularly stable,
etomidate is associated with i mortality in septic patients.
• If acidotic and needing rSI, consider low-p ressure ventilation to avoid
hypercapnia worsening acidosis.
• anticipate and prepare for cardiovascular collapse on induction due
to vasodilation and sympatholysis. Ensure vasopressor drugs are
available (e.g. adrenaline 1:10 000) and prepared (e.g. metaraminol,
phenylephrine and ephedrine). Metaraminol or phenylephrine infusion
can be useful at induction (see % p. 1209), but ensure infusion lines
primed before inducing anaesthesia.
• Insert and suction an nGT, if not already in place.
• neuraxial blockade should be used cautiously due to risks of infective
complications, sympatholysis with exaggerated hypotension and septic
coagulopathy which might have developed since the most recent
blood tests. If an epidural catheter is inserted, analgesia can be titrated
once CVS stability is achieved or postoperatively (i.e. in the ICU). IV
antibiotics should be given prior to a neuraxial procedure.
• a depth of anaesthesia monitor allows for titration of maintenance
anaesthesia and reduces the risk of awareness.9
• The effects and duration of action of all commonly administered
anaesthetic agents are unpredictable due to an altered volume of
distribution, metabolism, organ blood flow and function.
• avoid nSaIDs (including CoX- 2- selective agents) due to the risk
of akI.
• Blood glucose control should be implemented, aiming for a blood sugar
level of <10mmol/L while avoiding hypoglycaemia.10
Maintaining tissue oxygenation in the operating room
Fluids
• Use balanced salt solutions.11 albumin might be considered when
large volumes of crystalloid are used, but there is no evidence for
improvement of patient- centred outcomes.12 Starches are harmful and
discouraged.13
Inotropes/ vasoconstrictors
(See % p. 1209 for doses.) after adequate fluid resuscitation, noradren-
aline infusion titrated to a Map >65mmhg is 1st line for its vasopressor
effects. occasionally, and cautiously, vasopressin might be used as an add-
itional vasoactive drug, but evidence for patient- centred benefit is lacking. If
inotropy is required, adrenaline or dobutamine should be used. If the cause
for hypotension is unclear, an intraoperative echo (transthoracic echocardi-
ography or ToE, dependent on access) can help direct management.


## 頁面 1059

0318
1038 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
Induction, oxygen and positive end- expiratory pressure
• Desaturation with apnoea is rapid and should be anticipated due
to factors such as shunt and i basal metabolic rate. preparation
with preoxygenation, aiming for an ETo >90% (if possible), and
2
consideration of apnoeic oxygenation (i.e. with high-fl ow nasal
cannulae) can be lifesaving. Equipment used to oxygenate and initiate
ventilation should be able to provide pEEp.
• Commence ventilation with an Fio of 1.0 and titrate downwards to
2
achieve an Sao >90%, with pEEp starting at 5cmho.
2 2
• If the patient remains on a high Fio (>0.5) due to hypoxia, further
2
titration of pEEp can be useful (increasing the pEEp to 10cmho and
2
greater). There needs to be careful attention to haemodynamics (as
venous return will decrease and right heart afterload will increase, and
occasionally the shunt may be exacerbated).
• Blind recruitment manoeuvres are harmful in the ICU (risks include
cardiovascular collapse and ventilator- induced lung injury) and should be
used very cautiously.14
• persistent difficulty with oxygenation should prompt postoperative
prone positioning and consideration of ECMo referral.15
Ventilation
• Intra- and extraparenchymal pathology and i capillary permeability
in sepsis decrease lung compliance and produce high plateau airway
pressures, with a risk of ventilator- induced lung injury.
• In patients with early arDS, every effort should be made to provide
lung- protective ventilation, limiting the peak airway pressure to
30cmho and V to 6– 8mL/ kg of the IBW.16 permissive hypercapnia
2 T
should be tolerated to a lowest ph of 7.15, with anticipation of
resistance to catecholamines and a difficulty in oxygenation met with
pEEp titration. airway pressure targets should only cautiously be raised
with expert titration using tools like the driving pressure (pplat – pEEp
= <15cmho).17
2
• ongoing difficulty with ventilation may benefit from nMB, alongside
sedation (though more recent evidence is conflicting).18,19
References
1 Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour C, et al. (2016). The third international consensus definitions
for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis- 3). JAMA, 315, 801– 10.
2 rhodes a, Evans LE, alhazzani W, et al. (2017). Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guide-
lines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med, 43, 304– 77.
3 Levy MM, Evans LE, rhodes a (2018). The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Bundle: 2018 update.
Intensive Care Med, 44, 925– 8.
4 Beasley r, Chien J, Douglas J, et al. (2015). Thoracic Society of australia and new Zealand oxygen
guidelines for acute oxygen use in adults: swimming between the flags. Respirology, 20, 1182– 91.
5 asfar p, Meziani F, hamel JF, et al. (2014). high versus low blood-p ressure target in patients with
septic shock. N Engl J Med, 370, 1583– 93.
6 annane D, renault a, Brun- Buisson C, et al. (2018). hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone for
adults with septic shock. N Engl J Med, 378, 809– 18.
7 Venkatesh B, Finfer S, Cohen J, et al. (2018). adjunctive glucocorticoid therapy in patients with
septic shock. N Engl J Med, 378, 797– 808.
8 ranieri VM, rubenfeld GD, Thompson BT, et al. (2012). acute respiratory distress syndrome: the
Berlin definition. JAMA, 307, 2526– 33.
9 Jonker Wr, hanumanthiah D, o’Sullivan Ep, Cook TM, pandit JJ (2014). a national survey (nap5-
Ireland baseline) to estimate an annual incidence of accidental awareness during general anaes-
thesia in Ireland. Anaesthesia, 69, 969– 76.


## 頁面 1060

SEpSIS anD SEpTIC ShoCk 1039
10 Finfer S, Bellomo r, Blair D, et al. (2009). Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critic-
ally ill patients. N Engl J Med, 360, 1283– 97.
11 Semler MW, Self Wh, Wanderer Jp, et al. (2018). Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically
ill adults. N Engl J Med, 378, 829– 39.
12 Finfer S, Bellomo r, Boyce n, et al. (2004). a comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resusci-
tation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med, 350, 2247– 56.
13 Myburgh Ja, Finfer S, Bellomo r, et al. (2012). hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid resuscitation
in intensive care. N Engl J Med, 367, 1901– 11.
14 Cavalcanti aB, Suzumura Éa, Laranjeira Ln, et al. (2017). Effect of lung recruitment and titrated
positive end-e xpiratory pressure (pEEp) vs low pEEp on mortality in patients with acute respira-
tory distress syndrome— a randomized clinical trial. JAMA, 318, 1335– 45.
15 Guérin C, reignier J, richard JC, et al. (2013). prone positioning in severe acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome. N Engl J Med, 368, 2159– 68.
16 Brower rG, Matthay Ma, Morris a, Schoenfeld D, Thompson BT, Wheeler a (2000). Ventilation
with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the
acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med, 342, 1301– 8.
17 amato MBp, Meade Mo, Slutsky aS, et al. (2014). Driving pressure and survival in the acute
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med, 372, 747– 55.
18 papazian L, Forel JM, Gacouin a, et al. (2010). neuromuscular blockers in early acute respiratory
distress syndrome. N Engl J Med, 363, 1107– 16.
19 Moss M, huang DT, Brower rG, et al. (2019). Early neuromuscular blockade in the acute respira-
tory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med, 380, 1997– 2008.


## 頁面 1061

0410
1040 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
Emergency laparotomy
(See also % pp. 1035–9; % pp. 1044–5.)
Indications for laparotomy include: bowel obstruction, perforation, in-
fection, ischaemia and bleeding. physiological derangement and organ dys-
function are associated with both the underlying disease process and the
surgery itself:
• CVS instability due to vasoplegia and altered Co due to d preload,
depressed myocardial function and arrhythmias exacerbated by
electrolyte dysfunction and acidosis.
• Impaired oxygenation from V/ Q mismatching due to atelectasis, d
FrC, fluid extravasation into pulmonary interstitium, reduced lung
compliance, abdominal distension and/ or pain, leading to i work of
breathing or i inspiratory pressures.
• renal hypoperfusion, i abdominal pressures and septic mediators can
cause akI.
• Coagulopathy which may be related to sepsis or major bleeding.
anaemia and bleeding might be exacerbated by acidosis, dilution and
hypothermia.
• Stress- induced hyperglycaemia and altered drug metabolism. Tissue
hypoxia is a common cause of metabolic acidosis and demonstrated by
a high blood lactate and a high anion gap (>14).
The recurrent Uk national Emergency Laparotomy audit highlighted that
the 30d mortality of emergency laparotomy remains 710%. outcomes are
worse in the elderly. The mortality benefit from standardisation of care
has plateaued and wider organisational changes may be required to achieve
further reductions.20
Multiple risk factors associated with mortality have been identified
(including age, aSa, emergency surgery and peritoneal soiling).21
Preoperative assessment
• While a period of preoperative resuscitation may benefit some
patients, this should not delay surgery which should be performed by an
experienced team.
• a validated risk scoring tool (e.g. the nELa risk calculator M https://
data.nela.org.uk/ riskcalculator) and assessment of frailty should be
conducted preoperatively. This allows for discussion of individualised
benefit vs risk with the patient and family, mobilisation of consultant-l ed
services and ICU/ hDU admission for those with an estimated mortality
of >5%.
• o should be administered preoperatively to all hypoxic patients.
2
• peritonitis and sepsis are common. prompt antibiotic cover within the
1st hour in line with local guidelines should be given to cover Gram-
positive, Gram- negative and anaerobic bacteria.22
• an nGT should be inserted in patients with intestinal obstruction.
• administration of balanced crystalloids is encouraged to minimise
acidosis and akI.23
• Investigations: FBC, electrolytes (including Mg2+), LFTs, amylase, clotting,
lactate, G&S, ECG and CXr where appropriate. reported CT imaging
can assist surgical planning.
• Electrolytes will often be deranged and should be corrected as soon as
possible perioperatively.


## 頁面 1062

EMErGEnCy LaparoToMy 1041
• aim for a blood sugar level <10mmol/L (avoid hypoglycaemia).24
• Metabolic lactic acidosis is common and may improve with titrated fluid
and CVS support.
• Bleeding should be anticipated and reversal of anticoagulant therapy
must be considered (see % pp. 269–76).
Intraoperative care
• a high-r isk patient warrants the presence of a consultant anaesthetist
and surgeon.20
• IaBp monitoring should be established prior to induction.
• Secure a large- bore IV cannula prior to induction and connect warm
fluid/ fluid warmer.
• aspirate the nGT prior to induction.
• anticipate major hypotension following induction. have vasopressors
(ephedrine, metaraminol, phenylephrine and/o r adrenaline) and
vagolytics (atropine, glycopyrronium) drawn up and to hand. Consider
vasoconstrictor infusions from the start.
• a CVC may be required for vasopressor and inotrope infusions,
administration of electrolytes and postoperative parenteral nutrition.
• perform maximal preoxygenation and anticipate rapid desaturation.
high- flow nasal cannulae may provide apnoeic oxygenation.
• Careful consideration of the risk of CVS collapse from induction drug
dosage vs the risk of aspiration is essential (see % p. 388), as all agents
can precipitate life- threatening hypotension. ketamine (1– 2mg/ kg IV) or
midazolam may be useful in the severely compromised patient.
• rocuronium at rSI dosage (0.9– 1.2mg/ kg) or suxamethonium.
• Depth of anaesthesia monitoring can allow for titration of anaesthesia
and may reduce both the risks of hypotension and awareness.25
• Ventilation can be challenging. raised intra- abdominal pressure leads to
i airway pressures. Employ a lung- protective ventilation strategy with
pEEp titration.
• Fluid assessment:
• Enquire about any underlying cardiac conditions.
• know how much and which fluids have been administered
preoperatively.
• Goal- directed fluid technologies may help (e.g. oesophageal Doppler,
pulse wave analysis, CVp), although there is limited evidence that they
improve outcomes in abdominal surgery.
• a restrictive fluid strategy has been shown to increase akI in non-
urgent abdominal surgery.26
• In addition to balanced crystalloids, ensure that balanced blood
products are readily available, with consideration of adjuncts (calcium,
temperature control and tranexamic acid). Coagulation studies and
viscoelastic studies can be used to guide transfusion.
• patients who require repeated bolus doses of vasopressors, despite
what is judged to be adequate volume administration, should be
commenced on a vasopressor infusion early. noradrenaline via CVC is
the 1st choice for the septic patient. adrenaline or dobutamine may be
useful in patients with measured or suspected low Co.27
• Measure core temperature and maintain normothermia to minimise
coagulopathy and altered drug pharmacokinetics.


## 頁面 1063

0412
1042 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
• analgesia:
• opioids remain the mainstay for intraoperative analgesia in most
institutions.
• Caution with remifentanil and associated bradycardia,
• neuraxial blockade should be used cautiously due to risks of
infective complications, sympatholysis and septic or haematological
coagulopathy.
• rectus sheath catheters can be inserted at the end of the procedure,
and La administered postoperatively (see % p. 1133).
• Monitor lactate and aBGs throughout the case to help guide
perioperative response to therapies and aid decision-m aking on the
postoperative disposition.
Postoperative care
• Consider ICU/ hDU in high-r isk or at- risk patients. Elderly and frail
patients have a higher mortality and ideally would be admitted to critical
care. If an ICU/ hDU bed is unavailable, patients should be kept in
recovery for ongoing observation, and the same level of care provided
with ongoing reassessment of organ dysfunction.20
• assess for the risk of abdominal compartment syndrome. high
ventilatory pressures (>30cmho) with hypoxia at the time of closure
2
are concerning and should be discussed with the surgeon and intensivist
(laparostomy may be helpful).
• Urine output should target >0.5mL/ kg/ h. In patients with persistently
low urine output, assess fluid balance and reconsider vasoactive support
to minimise akI. akI might be multifactorial (e.g. hypoperfusion, septic
akI, nephrotoxins, abdominal compartment syndrome). Continuous
renal replacement therapy might be required.
• optimise analgesia and provide chest physiotherapy to reduce the
risk of hospital- acquired pneumonia (with early commencement of
antibiotics if suspected).
• VTE prophylaxis when surgeon happy.
• Consider antacid prophylaxis if patient not able to eat.
• Consider parenteral nutrition if patient to remain nil by mouth.
• Specialist geriatrician input is recommended for elderly and frail patients.
• Timely communication with the family is important as the patient’s care
progresses.


## 頁面 1064

EMErGEnCy LaparoToMy 1043
References
20 nELa project Team (2019). Fifth Patient Report of the National Emergency Laparotomy Audit,
December 2017 to November 2018. London: royal College of anaesthetists.
21 Eugene n, oliver CM, Bassett MG, et al. (2018). Development and internal validation of a novel
risk adjustment model for adult patients undergoing emergency laparotomy surgery: the national
Emergency Laparotomy audit risk model. Br J Anaesth, 121, 739– 48.
22 Levy MM, Evans LE, rhodes a (2018). The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Bundle: 2018 update.
Intensive Care Med, 44, 925– 8.
23 Semler MW, Self Wh, Wanderer Jp, et al. (2018). Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically
ill adults. N Engl J Med, 378, 829– 39.
24 Finfer S, Bellomo r, Blair D, et al. (2009). Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critic-
ally ill patients. N Engl J Med, 360, 1283– 97.
25 Jonker Wr, hanumanthiah D, o’Sullivan Ep, Cook TM, pandit JJ (2014). a national survey
(nap5- Ireland baseline) to estimate an annual incidence of accidental awareness during general
anaesthesia in Ireland. Anaesthesia, 69, 969– 76.
26 Myles pS, Bellomo r, Corcoran T, et al. (2018). restrictive versus liberal fluid therapy for major
abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med, 378, 2263– 74.
27 rhodes a, Evans LE, alhazzani W, et al. (2017). Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guide-
lines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med, 43, 304– 77.


## 頁面 1065

0414
1044 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
The ICU patient going to theatre
Care of a critically ill patient needing surgery can be challenging, and se-
nior anaesthetists and surgeons must be involved to facilitate timely and
appropriate perioperative planning. routine aspects of anaesthesia pre-
operative assessment remain relevant to the critically ill patient and must
not be overlooked.
Preoperative assessment
a system- based patient evaluation of active life- threatening problems,
organ function and current level of support can be gained at the bedside,
with discussion with the critical care medical and nursing teams. The patient
may not be able to give consent. This should be obtained from the medical
enduring power of attorney (usually next of kin), advance directives re-
spected and if required or treatment guided by the best interests standard.
• respiratory: note the patient’s current level of respiratory support
and recent trends, and formulate a perioperative ventilation strategy.
knowledge of additional respiratory therapy (secretion load,
bronchodilators) can be valuable to troubleshoot intraoperative
problems.
• Cardiovascular: note volume and type of fluids administered and
vasopressor/ inotrope infusions rates. recent echocardiography, CVp
and Co monitors may help guide further therapy.
• Confirm IV access. know which lines are available for use without
compromising other therapies. know which line is best for rapid fluid
administration.
• Check recent FBC, U&E, coagulation studies, glucose and aBG. Ensure
a valid G&S ± X-m atched blood is available.
• Intubated patients are often lightly sedated to allow tube tolerance and
comfort, with the risks of prolonged sedation. Ensure adequate level of
anaesthesia prior to muscle relaxation.
• Check if any scheduled drugs will be due in theatre (e.g. antibiotics).
• Fasting: evidence is emerging for non- airway surgery that in intubated
patients, a shorter fasting period may be acceptable to reduce delays
and extended caloric deficits. aspirate nGTs prior to theatre.
Conduct of anaesthesia
• If the patient is not intubated, the decision of where to intubate (ICU
vs theatre) is influenced by available personnel, need for equipment,
familiarity with environment and clinical stability.
• Exercise vigilance when transferring between bed and operating table, as
there is a risk of losing lines and tubes. Where the patient is on multiple
infusions, transferring and maintaining the pumps on a single infusion
stack will reduce tangling of lines, disconnections and inadvertent drug
errors. Transfer the patient towards, not away, from lines.
• Disconnect the ETT from the anaesthesia circuit prior to transfer; the
ETT can be clamped prior to disconnection if there is concern about
infection, atelectasis or derecruitment.
• Increasing depth of anaesthesia can be achieved with any combination
of opioids, sedatives/ analgesia, TIVa or inhalational agents.
• nMBas may be needed to facilitate intubation, ventilation or surgery.
Ensure you hand over to the ICU team the timing of their delivery.


## 頁面 1066

ThE ICU paTIEnT GoInG T o ThEaTrE 1045
• Use of a processed EEG may reduce the incidence of awareness.
Maintenance of lighter depths of anaesthesia may not reduce morbidity
or mortality as previously thought.
• Fluid therapy should reflect whether the patient may still be in the
resuscitative or stabilisation and optimisation phase of their illness. The
choice of fluid will be influenced by surgical losses, the metabolic status
and the 1° pathology.
• analgesic strategies depend on whether the patient will be waking up
postoperatively or not. Liaise with the ICU team to formulate a plan.
• Ensure a full verbal and written handover is given to the ICU medical
and nursing staff, and clearly communicate any important postoperative
events and outcomes.
• Contact next of kin if appropriate.
Further reading
Short TG, Campbell D, Frampton C, et al. (2019). anaesthetic depth and complications after major
surgery: an international, randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 394, 1907– 14.
Segaran E, Barker I, hartle a (2016). optimising enteral nutrition in critically ill patients by reducing
fasting times. J Intensive Care Soc, 17, 38– 43.
hoste Ea, Maitland k, Brudney CS, et al. (2014). Four phases of intravenous fluid therapy: a concep-
tual model. Br J Anaesth, 113, 740– 7.
pandit JJ, andrade J, Bogod DG, et al. (2014). The 5th national audit project (nap5) on accidental
awareness during general anaesthesia: summary of main findings and risk factors. Anaesthesia,
69, 1089– 101.


## 頁面 1067

0416
1046 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
Transferring the critically ill
Transfer of a critically ill patient within or between health care facilities may
be needed to access specialist investigations or procedures or for repat-
riation and rehabilitation. Transferring patients requires trained staff and
careful preparation in order to not compromise the level of care delivered
and to ensure patient and staff safety. Specialised transport teams may im-
prove outcomes but are not always available. Before transferring any critic-
ally ill patient, the risks of transfer should be weighed against the potential
benefits of transfer.
Chain of command and planning
• once an indication for transfer and the receiving unit have been
identified, one coordinator assumes overall responsibility for the
whole transfer process. This person should understand the transport
modalities available and their advantages and disadvantages, as well as
the experience of the staff involved.
• The initiation of a transfer should follow clear guidelines and
protocolled channels of communication.
• The transfer should not adversely affect the provision of care at the
transferring hospital by depleting staff numbers or available equipment.
Transfer modality
• patients may be transferred by road or air.
• Different facilities are available in different vehicles and craft, and the
choice depends on the requirements of the patient. Ideally, for ICU
transfer, there should be reasonable access to the patient, electrical
supply, o supply, adequate lighting and ability to communicate within
2
the vehicle and the hospitals.
• Factors influencing the choice of transport modality include: effect
on patient’s condition, availability, staff experience/t raining, locations
involved, distance, road situation (closures/ rush hour), weather
and cost.
• Whatever the modality, respect the staff of the vehicle or craft in which
you are; they know it intimately and can advise you on the best way to
avoid difficulties en route.
Aeromedical transfer (helicopter and fixed-w ing aircraft)
• often used for longer distances where time is of the essence.
• Most aircraft are pressurised to 1500– 2000m above sea level, but
pressure inside the helicopter is dependent on the height they fly.
height of helicopter transfer may be dependent on the flight path.
reduced barometric pressure can have deleterious effects on patients.
air- filled cavities expand as atmospheric pressure decreases with
altitude. pneumothoraces, obstructed bowel or air emboli can worsen.
pre- emptive chest drains and nGTs may be required. Endotracheal cuffs
may expand.
• There is a decrease in o partial pressure at altitude, so non- ventilated
2
patients may require additional o support.
2
• Both fixed- wing aircraft and helicopters may be located at a nearby
airport, so that the 1° mode of transport may be preceded or followed
by an ambulance transfer. More often hospitals have on-s ite helipads
allowing for site– site transfer.


## 頁面 1068

TranSFErrInG ThE CrITICaLL y ILL 1047
• helicopter transfer involves greater vibratory forces and noise,
compared to fixed-w ing aircrafts or ambulances, and carrying capacity,
patient access, air speed and range are lower than with fixed-w ing
aircrafts, making it less suitable over longer distances.
Ambulance transfer
• road transport is cheaper and often faster to mobilise and presents
fewer physiological disturbances and easier patient access.
• The standards for an emergency ambulance stipulate the presence of a
minimal o supply of 2000L (usually 2F- sized cylinders), direct current/
2
aC power inverters and basic monitoring equipment. however, it is
best to assume that everything will be supplied by the transfer team.
• When considering road safety, the goal is to facilitate smooth and rapid
transfer, with minimum acceleration and deceleration. high-s peed
travel is rarely necessary. The driver will decide on the need for lights
and sirens, depending on the road conditions and information from the
transfer team.
Preparation
Familiarity with the transfer environment aids planning and preparation for
the transfer and potential emergency scenarios.
Patient preparation
• Dependent on urgency of transfer (ruptured aaa vs stable ICU
patient). Stabilisation and interventions must be weighed against urgency
of transfer. Even if stable, prepare for clinical deterioration en route.
• The airway is usually secured with an ETT if deterioration is anticipated.
Ventilated patients should be safely established on the transport
ventilator before departure. Check aBG if possible.
• IV access must be robustly secured, reliable and readily accessible. Use
extension lines.
• arterial lines may be more reliable than nIBp which can be affected by
movement and vibration.
• Chest drains, nGTs and catheters, if sited, must be secured.
• Ensure sedation is adequate for i stimulation during transit and
administer nMBa if needed.
• protect pressure areas, while ensuring patient and equipment are
securely fastened to the transport stretcher.
• have means to keep the patient warm—c hildren are extremely
susceptible to hypothermia.
• Inform the receiving team that you are leaving the base hospital.
• Inform relatives about the transfer and advise them what to do at the
receiving hospital.
Drugs, equipment and monitors
• The range of drugs and equipment available should allow maintenance
of current management, treatment of predictable changes in the
patient’s condition and the treatment of acute medical emergencies
(Table 38.1).


## 頁面 1069

0418
1048 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
Table 38.1 Checklist for transfer equipment and medications
Airway and breathing Suction equipment, tracheal tubes, connectors, ties,
stethoscope, tracheostomy tubes (if appropriate),
face masks, airways, self- inflating bag with reservoir,
laryngoscopes, spare batteries, gum elastic bougie
Circulation Cannulae plus IV dressings and tape, appropriate IV
fluids/ blood and associated giving sets. Syringes, needles
and safe sharps disposal container
Resuscitation drugs adenosine, adrenaline, amiodarone, atropine,
calcium chloride, furosemide, glucose, GTn spray,
hydrocortisone, lidocaine, lorazepam, metoprolol,
naloxone, noradrenaline, salbutamol (with
appropriate delivery equipment), 0.9% sodium
chloride, sodium bicarbonate
Drug labels
Sedation and propofol, midazolam
NMDAs atracurium, rocuronium or suxamethonium
Neurological Mannitol, hypertonic sodium chloride
Additional paediatric paediatric o 2 mask with reservoir bag, tracheal
equipment tubes, small cannulae, appropriately sized self-
inflating bag with reservoir, laryngoscope and stylets
Io needle
Magill forceps and suction catheters. paediatric drug
doses calculated and written down
10% glucose for correction of hypoglycaemia
• Gravity- fed drips are unreliable in moving vehicles, so pumps and
pressure bags should be used and mounted at, or below, the level of
the patient to enable access to the patient.
• o and drugs supply should be in excess of estimated transport
2
requirements. Drugs that will be affected by interruptions should be
preconnected, with scope to ‘double pump’.
• know if your vehicle has its own o supply.
2
• ECG and Bp are susceptible to motion artefact, and nIBp may rapidly
deplete the battery.
• Ensure all battery- dependent equipment is charged and plugged into a
power source in the transport vehicle, if possible.
You and your team
• Transfers can happen near the end of your shift. recognise your
limitations and fatigue, and do not go on a transfer if you do not feel
comfortable to do so.
• Ensure you have the appropriate medical indemnity to go on a transfer.
Consider non- sedating antiemetic prior to transfer if you have a history
of travel sickness.
• Wear warm clothes and take money with you.
• Understand how you and your equipment (e.g. ICU monitors, infusion
pumps) will get back to the base hospital. This may be by taxi (know
how this will be paid for).


## 頁面 1070

TranSFErrInG ThE CrITICaLL y ILL 1049
Table 38.2 Checklist for preparation to transfer a patient
Airway Is the airway safe? If in doubt, intubate
Cervical spine control
Breathing portable ventilator settings. Check aBG after 15min on the
portable ventilator, before departure
Self- inflating bag– valve device in the event of a ventilator/
o failure
2
Suction
adequate o reserves
2
Insert a chest drain if there is a possibility of a
pneumothorax (e.g. fractured ribs)
Circulation Stable circulation with good access
Controlled external bleeding
Invasive Bp when indicated
Inotropes: if in doubt, have them prepared and
ready to run
pumps and batteries
Consider inserting a urinary catheter, and monitor output
Disability adequate sedation, analgesia and nMBa
GCS, pupillary signs
nGT/ oGT
Exposure avoid hypothermia
Splint long bones
Forgotten all notes, referral letter, results, radiographs (including CT
scans) and blood products
Inform the receiving unit that you are leaving the base
hospital
Inform relatives
Take contact numbers
Take warm clothing, mobile phone, food and credit card/
money for the team!
plan for the return journey
Medical indemnity and insurance for death or disability of
transfer staff
• Ensure you have enough personal protective equipment (specialist
equipment may be required).
• Take a charged telephone with the numbers of the base and receiving
hospital contacts.
• relatives, especially of paediatric patients, often request to travel with
the patient. For air transfers, the pilot decides who can be transported
as weight restrictions apply. always discuss with the vehicle/a ircraft
crew prior to agreeing to a travel request, and ensure everyone
(including yourself) is briefed before boarding.
• Whatever the mode of transport, try to position yourself so you have a
view of the patient and monitoring.
• Equipment can become a missile in the event of a sudden deceleration,
so ensure it is secured correctly.


## 頁面 1071

0510
1050 ChapTEr 38 The emergency patient
• helicopters and, less so, ambulances are noisy and you may be
required to wear ear protectors. alarms are unreliably heard, even at
their maximum setting, so monitoring should be visible. If there is a
paramedic more familiar with the environment than you are, ask them
to help en route, such that you are able to remain hands- off, if possible,
and maintain situational awareness.
Paperwork
• Take: a concise handover, photocopy of the patient’s notes and drug
charts, pertinent imaging and lab results.
• The transport record should document the patient’s clinical status
before, during and after transport, relevant medical conditions,
environmental factors, therapy given, adverse logistical events and
procedures undertaken.
• perform a predeparture checklist (Table 38.2).
Further reading
association of anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (2009). Inter- hospital transfer. London:
association of anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland.
australasian College for Emergency Medicine (aCEM); australian and new Zealand
College of anaesthetists (anZCa); College of Intensive Care Medicine of australia
and new Zealand (CICM) (2015). Guidelines for transport of critically ill patients. M
https:// www.anzca.edu.au/ getattachment/ bd5938d2- d3ab- 4546- a6b0- 014b11b99b2f/
pS52- Guideline- for- transport- of- critically- ill- patients
Whiteley S, Mark J, Barratt h, Binks r (2011). Guidelines for the transport of the critically ill adult.
London: Intensive Care Society.

