# Chapter 40: Regional anaesthesia 區域麻醉


*Source: pages 1120-1171*


## 頁面 1120

Chapter 40 1099
Regional anaesthesia
Mark Fairley
Fundamentals of safe practice 1100
Local anaesthetics and adjuncts 1102
Finding nerves 1104
Needle design 1108
Continuous regional anaesthesia 1108
Regional anaesthesia and coagulation disorders 1109
Regional anaesthesia and nerve injury 1112
Nerve blocks: central neuraxial blocks 1114
Nerve blocks: neck 1118
Nerve blocks: upper limb 1119
Nerve blocks: trunk 1128
Nerve blocks: lower limb 1135
Resources 1145

## 頁面 1121

0110
1100 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Fundamentals of safe practice
Patient consent
In terms of regional anaesthesia, this will include:
• an explanation of how the block will be performed and if any sedation
or Ga will be used in addition to the regional block.
• an explanation of the risks and benefits of the regional anaesthesia
technique and any alternatives. Generic risks relevant to most regional
techniques include failure, local anaesthetic systemic toxicity (LaSt)
and vessel and nerve damage. Generic benefits usually include less pain,
less opioids and their side effects (e.g. less nausea and vomiting) and
earlier mobilisation. technique- specific risks and benefits should also be
mentioned, and the consent process documented.
Preparation
• Regional anaesthesia should ideally be performed in a quiet, calm
environment, in an unhurried manner. Specific ‘block rooms’ are
becoming popular for this purpose.
• appropriate aseptic precautions should be taken.
• equipment necessary for the regional anaesthetic should be prepared,
and drugs clearly labelled.
• the equipment and drugs necessary for resuscitation and administration
of Ga should be immediately available and checked.
• Monitoring should include the continuous presence of an anaesthetist
and the provision of eCG, NIBp and SpO.
2
• trained assistance is as necessary for the safe and effective conduct of
regional anaesthesia as it is for Ga.
Documentation
Documentation of the procedure should include the following:
• Whether the patient is anaesthetised, sedated or awake
• Block performed; needle used
• Nerve location technique used (ultrasound, pNS, loss of resistance)
• Volume and concentration of La used, along with any adjuncts
• If using a pNS, the stimulus duration, current threshold and whether the
start of La injection was associated with ‘twitch abolition’
• If using ultrasound, consideration of recording images, as per local
facility capability and policies
• Whether the injection was easy without resistance or if any injection
pressure monitoring was used
• Whether any pain or paraesthesiae was experienced on injection
• any complications that occurred
• the block effect and any supplementation required.
Training and supervision
the acquisition of a detailed knowledge of the anatomy and pharmacology
should be followed by a study of the block to be performed. the trainee
should then discuss the block with an appropriately experienced teacher
and should observe the performance of the block. the teacher should
closely supervise the trainee in the performance of the block for as many
times as is necessary, to be confident that the trainee is both competent
and safe.

## 頁面 1122

FuNDaMeNtaLS OF SaFe pRa CtICe 1101
all trainees should focus on learning a small number of basic blocks that
cover the vast majority of surgical procedures. a proposed list of these
high- value basic blocks that all general trainees should learn has recently
been published1 (table 40.1).
Regional anaesthesia fellowships and diplomas are formal training path-
ways added on to general training for those wanting advanced skills in
regional anaesthesia.
Table 40.1 proposed high- value basic ultrasound- guided regional anaesthetic
techniques
Anatomical Plan A (basic blocks) Plan B/ C/ D (advanced blocks)
location
Shoulder Interscalene brachial Superior trunk block, combined
plexus block axillary and suprascapular nerve blocks
Below axillary brachial plexus Infraclavicular block, supraclavicular
shoulder block block
hip Femoral nerve block Fascia iliaca block, lumbar plexus block
Knee adductor canal block Femoral nerve block ± ipaCK block
Foot and popliteal sciatic block ankle blocks, proximal sciatic nerve
ankle block
Chest wall erector spinae plane paravertebral, superficial serratus
block anterior plane, pSp and Ipp blocks
abdominal Rectus sheath block Quadratus lumborum blocks
midline
Reproduced from turbitt LR et al. Future directions in regional anaesthesia: not just for the
cognoscenti, Anaesthesia, 2019:75;293– 7, with permission from Wiley. © 2019 association on
anaesthetists.
Note some names of blocks have been changed from the original article, in line with 2021 inter-
national consensus on nomenculture.
Personal audit
Regional anaesthetists should keep a record of the blocks they perform.
Difficulties encountered, success rates and complications should be re-
corded and should be both compared with available published data and dis-
cussed in an appraisal process. Lower success rates or higher complication
rates than are currently accepted, or any serious complications, should be
discussed with an appropriate colleague.

## 頁面 1123

0112
1102 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Local anaesthetics and adjuncts
Local anaesthetics
properties of common Las are listed in table 40.2.
Table 40.2 properties of common local anaesthetics
Local pKa Onset Protein Duration Maximum dose
anaesthetic binding (%) of action (mg/ kg)
Bupivacaine 8.1 Medium 95 Long 2
Levobupivacaine 8.1 Medium 95 Long 2
Ropivacaine 8.1 Medium 94 Long 3
prilocaine 7.7 Fast 55 Medium 6
(8 with adrenaline)
Lidocaine 7.7 Fast 65 Medium 3
(7 with adrenaline)
LaSt occurs when an excessive amount of La enters the circulation.
Risk can be reduced by observing maximum doses, injecting slowly in small
boluses, interspersed with frequent gentle aspirations to exclude accidental
intravascular needle placement, and use of ultrasound.2,3 Older, sicker
patients, single- site large doses and more vascular injection sites can all
increase risks.
Levobupivacaine and ropivacaine are less toxic than bupivacaine. the
higher toxicity of bupivacaine is related to the R- enantiomer which binds
more firmly and is released more slowly from the myocardium.
toxicity from prilocaine is less likely because of its rapid metabolism,
primarily by the liver. Methaemoglobinaemia may occur with high doses
(>600mg in an adult) and should be treated with methylthioninium chloride
(methylene blue 1– 2mg/ kg).
allergic reactions to Las are extremely rare. the ester groups are more
prone to exhibiting allergic reactions than amides. (See % pp. 1092–3 for
presentation and management of LaSt.)
Adjuncts
• table 40.3 provides a list of adjuncts commonly added to Las to
improve their effects.
• None of the currently used adjuncts are approved for perineural
administration. Optimal doses are not clearly established.
• ensure any adjunct preparation is preservative-f ree.

## 頁面 1124

LOCaL aNaeSthetICS aND aDjuNCtS 1103
Table 40.3 Commonly used adjuncts to local anaesthetics
Drug Characteristics
Dexamethasone prolongs long- acting La block by 4– 8h.4 also has
similar effects when given IV. possibly incompatible with
ropivacaine as crystallisation demonstrated in vitro. Can
increase blood sugar level. Dose 4mg
Clonidine prolongs block by 1.5– 2.5h.4 effective in epidural,
caudal, spinal and peripheral nerve blocks. use is limited
by hypotension, bradycardia and sedation. Dose 150
micrograms
Dexmedetomidine prolongs block by 3– 4h.4 Longer than clonidine, but not as
long as dexamethasone. i risk of sedation, bradycardia and
hypotension. Suggestion that it may cause more differential
block (sensory greater than motor) and may have some
neuroprotective effects. Dose 50– 60 micrograms
Bicarbonate added to reduce pain from SC injection and to increase
speed of onset by increasing ph of solution, and therefore
fraction of unionised La. add 1mL of 8.4% to every
10mL of lidocaine or 20mL of bupivacaine. Discard La if
precipitate forms
Opioids proven synergism with intrathecal and epidural La. Beware
delayed respiratory depression with intrathecal morphine.
all opioids have been used. Of doubtful benefit in
peripheral blocks. Intrathecal remifentanil is contraindicated
due to the presence of glycine
Glucose used to increase baricity of La for intrathecal use.
hyperbaric bupivacaine contains 80mg/ mL of glucose.
allows more consistent spread of block and provides the
opportunity to control spread by altering patient position
hyaluronidase used in eye blocks to enhance La spread. Dose 15 units/m L

### 表格 1

| Table 40.3 Commonly used adjuncts to local anaesthetics |
| --- |
| Drug Characteristics |
| Dexamethasone prolongs long- acting La block by 4– 8h.4 also has similar effects when given IV. possibly incompatible with ropivacaine as crystallisation demonstrated in vitro. Can increase blood sugar level. Dose 4mg Clonidine prolongs block by 1.5– 2.5h.4 effective in epidural, caudal, spinal and peripheral nerve blocks. use is limited by hypotension, bradycardia and sedation. Dose 150 micrograms Dexmedetomidine prolongs block by 3– 4h.4 Longer than clonidine, but not as long as dexamethasone. i risk of sedation, bradycardia and hypotension. Suggestion that it may cause more differential block (sensory greater than motor) and may have some neuroprotective effects. Dose 50– 60 micrograms Bicarbonate added to reduce pain from SC injection and to increase speed of onset by increasing ph of solution, and therefore fraction of unionised La. add 1mL of 8.4% to every 10mL of lidocaine or 20mL of bupivacaine. Discard La if precipitate forms Opioids proven synergism with intrathecal and epidural La. Beware delayed respiratory depression with intrathecal morphine. all opioids have been used. Of doubtful benefit in peripheral blocks. Intrathecal remifentanil is contraindicated due to the presence of glycine Glucose used to increase baricity of La for intrathecal use. hyperbaric bupivacaine contains 80mg/ mL of glucose. allows more consistent spread of block and provides the opportunity to control spread by altering patient position hyaluronidase used in eye blocks to enhance La spread. Dose 15 units/m L |
|  |

## 頁面 1125

0114
1104 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Finding nerves
Anatomical landmark techniques
the safe practice of regional anaesthesia is based on a detailed knowledge
of anatomy and its variations. although most techniques based solely on
surface anatomy and the palpation of deeper structures have now been
superseded by pNS and ultrasound, several purely anatomical landmark-
based blocks are still effective and practical, e.g. spinal. ultrasound and
pNS techniques still require good anatomical knowledge for their safe and
effective use.
Clicks, pops and loss of resistance
Some fascial plane techniques, e.g. fascia iliaca block, have relied upon the
sensation of a blunt or blunted needle passing through a fascial plane to
identify the correct anatomical location for injection. these ‘clicks’ and
‘pops’ take experience to appreciate and have a significant failure rate. With
ultrasound availability, most of these techniques have been superseded.
however, they still have a role where ultrasound is not available or not
practical. Loss of resistance has been used successfully for many decades to
identify the epidural space correctly and remains the technique of choice.
Paraesthesia
Direct contact between needle and nerve may result in an unpleasant ‘elec-
tric shock’ sensation that is felt in the distribution of the target nerve. this
is termed ‘paraesthesia’ and, before the introduction of nerve stimulation,
was often sought as confirmation of needle proximity to a nerve. With the
availability of pNS and ultrasound machines, paraesthesia is now seen as
an unnecessary needle– nerve contact that could potentially increase the
risk of nerve damage. however, in experienced hands and in the absence
of nerve stimulators and ultrasound machines, this technique may still be
effectively used.
Nerve stimulation
the use of nerve stimulators dominated the art of nerve location in the
final 20y of the last century and is still widely practised. the production of
evoked muscle contractions at low current levels (0.2–0 .5ma) is thought
to confirm the placement of a needle near a nerve, while the production
of evoked contractions at very low current thresholds (<0.2ma) is thought
to indicate possible intraneural needle tip placement. If the target nerve
contains sensory fibres, the sensation may be unpleasant. the use of nerve
stimulators remains popular, either on their own, if no ultrasound machine
is available, or in combination with ultrasound. When used with ultrasound,
they can provide the anaesthetist with reassurance that the structure on the
screen is the target nerve, demonstrate twitches and functional anatomy to
educate trainees and, as an additional monitor, can help exclude intraneural
needle tip placement.

## 頁面 1126

FINDING NeRVeS 1105
Using a peripheral nerve stimulator
• Connect the stimulating needle to the negative lead (black) and the
ground electrode and the eCG pad to the positive lead (red): ‘negative
to needle, positive to patient’.
• Keep the eCG electrode at least 20cm from the site of injection. Start
with a current of 1.0– 2.0ma and a frequency of 2hz. In theory, a
stimulus duration of 0.1ms will preferentially stimulate motor nerves,
rather than sensory nerves, and may be less unpleasant for the patient.
• Insert the insulated needle. at all times, move the needle slowly and
gently, watching for signs of nerve stimulation. aim to move the needle
in small, steady steps, no more than 1– 2mm at a time.
• When the desired muscle contractions are evoked, try to optimise the
position of the needle to obtain a good motor response in the muscles
supplied by the target nerve while reducing the stimulating current to
0.2– 0.5ma.
• If twitches continue to occur at <0.2ma, withdraw the needle slightly
as this may indicate intraneural needle placement.
• aspirate to exclude intravascular needle placement and inject 1mL of
La solution. the motor response should disappear because the nerve
is displaced by fluid (‘twitch abolition’). If the motor response does
not disappear with the initial 1mL, suspect that the needle may be
intraneural. Withdraw the needle slightly before further injection.
• Inject the full volume in small boluses, interspersed by careful
aspirations. If there is any pain or significant resistance to injection, stop
immediately and withdraw the needle slightly as this may also indicate
intraneural placement.
Ultrasound
ultrasound has become increasingly available in the last 10–2 0y and has
allowed the direct vision of needle tip placement and La spread relative to
the target nerve and surrounding structures.
Long- axis and short- axis imaging
Cylindrical structures like nerves and vessels can be imaged in long axis,
meaning the structure is parallel to the long axis of the probe, giving a long
rectangular view of the structure across the screen. Short-a xis imaging
means the structure is perpendicular to the long axis of the probe, resulting
in a short circular view of the structure in the middle of the screen. Short-
axis imaging is the most popular for nerve blocks as it is easier to keep
the target nerve in the imaging plane and the relative positions of any sur-
rounding neurovascular structures are more easily seen.
In- plane and out-o f- plane needling
When using an in-p lane (Ip) needling technique, the needle is inserted from
one end of the probe and passed along the long axis of the probe, so the
image is of the entire length of the needle. this has the advantage that you
can keep the tip of the needle visible as you advance it. With the out- of-
plane (OOp) needling technique, the needle is inserted at right angles to
the long axis of the probe and only a cross- section of the needle is visible at
any one time as a small white dot. the probe must be moved to continually

## 頁面 1127

0116
1106 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
reimage the needle tip as it is advanced. OOp needling is popular for vas-
cular access as catheters need to be advanced along the long axis of the
vessel. Ip needling is popular for most nerve blocks as the needle tip can
be imaged as it is advanced. Inexperienced ultrasound users are probably
safer using the Ip needling technique. experienced operators can use either
Ip or OOp safely.
Developing skills
Manipulating the ultrasound probe and needle in 3D, while looking at the
2D image on the screen, can be a difficult skill to acquire. Some tips that can
accelerate your passage from novice to expert include:
• Get taught properly by experienced ultrasound users.
• Learn from all available media: online videos, mobile apps, ultrasound
and cadaver courses and phantoms, as well as books.
• Do not only practise when performing a block. practise scanning
easily accessible aspects of yourself, colleagues and consented patients
whenever you can to become familiar with the knobology, probe
manipulation and identification of the sonoanatomy. practise needle
imaging with commercially available or easily made phantoms or meat
models.
Using ultrasound
• plan the ergonomics. position yourself, your hands and the screen in a
line, so you can easily look from your needle and probe to the display.
this usually means the machine is on the opposite side of the patient.
Make sure you know which end of the probe corresponds to the left
and right side of the display.
• Make small, slow movements of the probe. Like a torch beam, a small
change in angle sweeps the beam through a large arc.
• perform a prescan to identify the sonoanatomy; tilt the probe to make
the image of the nerve bright (anisotropy), then maintain that probe
tilt by holding the probe low and stabilising your hand on the patient.
Look at your hands and insert the needle from the near end of the
probe, making sure the needle trajectory is aiming along the centre of
the ultrasound beam. Once the needle has advanced under the probe,
look at the screen and slide (do not change the tilt) the probe slightly as
required to bring the needle into view.
• the needle needs to be in the 1mm-w ide ultrasound beam to be
seen. echogenic needles and needle imaging software can make a
needle image brighter but will not help if the needle is not in the
ultrasound beam!
• You should not advance the needle or inject if you cannot see its tip.
• Beware of obliquely imaged needles which will give a false tip
appearance. ensure you can recognise an obliquely imaged needle.
• You should see the La distending the tissues as soon as you inject the
first mL. If you do not, stop injecting as either you are not imaging your
needle tip or you may be in a compressed vessel.

## 頁面 1128

FINDING NeRVeS 1107
• Never inject against high resistance. Consider use of an injection
pressure monitoring device and/ or perform injection yourself rather
than have an assistant inject.
• Swelling of the nerve with separation of its fascicles indicates intraneural
injection. Stop injecting and withdraw slightly.
• Following injection, perform a postscan of the sonoanatomy to confirm
correct target and check spread of La.
Evidence for ultrasound
the use of ultrasound has revolutionised regional anaesthesia practice in
the last 20y. Its use has been shown to decrease the time taken to perform
nerve blocks, accelerate block onset, increase block success rate, decrease
the dose of La used and decrease the incidence of certain complications
such as vascular puncture and LaSt.2,5 Its use has become standard of care
in most countries.

## 頁面 1129

0118
1108 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Needle design
Many types of needle design are commonly used for regional anaesthesia,
whether pNBs or central neuraxial blocks.
• Long- bevelled needles (usually 10– 15°) are sharp and pass readily
through tissues, without giving the operator a clear sensation of passage
of the needle through tissue planes and fascial layers. these are more
likely to enter nerves than short- bevelled needles; hence they are
rarely used.
• Short- bevelled needles (18–4 5°) are less likely to enter individual
nerves, making them safer. they also provide the operator with more
feel of the passage of the needle through fascial layers. they are
currently the most popular tips for pNBs.
• Pencil- point needles are popular for spinal anaesthesia, as they are
thought to separate the fibres of the dura mater, rather than cut them
as would a bevelled needle. they are associated with a lower incidence
of pDph than the use of the bevelled alternative (often called the
Quincke- tip needle). pencil- point needles are rarely used for pNBs as
they are too difficult to pass through intact skin and fascial planes.
• Tuohy needles were originally designed to allow epidural
catheterisation, but the tip design has also been adapted for use in
placing peripheral nerve catheters. they also provide a lot of resistance
to passing through fascial planes, enhancing the feel of ‘pops’ used in
some landmark techniques.
• Insulated needles are coated with a non- conducting material that allows
current flow only from a small area at the tip of the needle. this can
improve accuracy of nerve location with pNS.
• Echogenic needles have been designed to more effectively reflect
ultrasound waves, via geometric indentations on their shaft, enhancing
visibility, especially at steeper angles of insertion.
Continuous regional anaesthesia
• Catheters can be placed near nerves to provide prolonged neural
blockade. Studies have shown that continuous regional anaesthesia
(CRa) provides superior analgesia to systemic techniques, while
accelerating early mobilisation and improving rehabilitation. In addition,
the side effects of opioids are minimised or avoided.6
• Surveillance during CRa is important. the patient needs to be taught
how to care for an insensate limb, and both patient and carers need to
be taught to identify the signs and symptoms of La toxicity and catheter
sepsis. CRa carries with it all the complications of single-s hot blocks,
along with additional risks of La toxicity, catheter misplacement or
movement and bacterial colonisation and sepsis.
• Nerve catheter placement is an advanced technique for experienced
practitioners.

## 頁面 1130

ReGIONaL aNaeStheSIa aND CO aGuLatION DISORDeRS 1109
Regional anaesthesia and coagulation
disorders
• Blood vessels are frequently encountered and damaged during the
performance of regional anaesthesia. these may be large vessels,
such as the axillary, subclavian and femoral arteries, or small blood
vessels such as epidural veins. Fortunately, the small holes made by
regional needles in patients with normal coagulation very rarely lead to
significant morbidity. those with abnormalities of coagulation, however,
can suffer significantly.7
• the use of anticoagulant drugs to prevent or treat Vte is increasing
rapidly, along with the number and potency of the drugs employed for
such purposes.
• haemorrhage can be significant in non-c ompressible locations.
haematomas can compress nerves and other anatomical structures.
the presence of even a relatively small haematoma in the non-
distensible spinal canal can cause permanent spinal cord injury.
• Different blocks have different relative risks of bleeding complications:
• Neuraxial
• > deep block, e.g. quadratus lumborum, paravertebral
• > perivascular blocks, e.g. supraclavicular, femoral
• > fascial plane blocks, e.g. fascia iliaca, erector spinae plane
• > superficial blocks, e.g. ankle blocks, forearm blocks.8
• Catheter insertion involves a greater risk than single-s hot blocks.
• ultrasound techniques allow vessel imaging and have been shown
to reduce the risk of vessel puncture relative to non-u ltrasound
techniques.2
• Coagulopathy is therefore a relative contraindication to the
performance of regional anaesthesia techniques. the degree of
contraindication will depend upon the extent of the coagulation defect,
the specific block planned, the block technique and the likely benefit of
the regional anaesthesia technique, compared to the alternatives. these
decisions should be made by experienced clinicians, familiar with current
guidelines, in consultation with the patient.
• Several guidelines for the management of patients with abnormalities of
coagulation exist:
• aoa (2013)9 M https:// anaesthetists.org/
home/ Resources- publications/ Guide lines/
Regional- anaesthesia- and- patients- with- abnormalities- of- coagulation
• american Society of Regional anaesthesia (2018)7 M https:// rapm.
bmj.com/ content/ rapm/ 43/ 3/ 263.full.pdf
• Canadian anesthesiologists Society (2019)8 M https:// rdcu.be/
b0pux
table 40.4 is drawn from the aoa guidelines9 (see also % p. 276.)

## 頁面 1131

1110
1110 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Table 40.4 Recommendations related to drugs used to modify coagulation
Drug Acceptable Administration Acceptable time after block
time after of drug performance or catheter
drug for block while spinal removal for next drug dose
performance or epidural
catheter in
place
uFh SC prophylaxis 4h or normal Caution 1h
activated
partial
thromboplastin
time ratio
uFh IV treatment 4h or normal Caution 4h
activated
partial
thromboplastin
time ratio
LMWh SC 12h Caution 4h
prophylaxis
LMWh SC 24h Not 4h
treatment recommended
Danaparoid avoid Not 6h
prophylaxis (consider anti- recommended
Xa levels)
Danaparoid avoid Not 6h
treatment (consider anti- recommended
Xa levels)
Bivalirudin 10h or normal Not 6h
apttR recommended
argatroban 4h or normal Not 6h
apttR recommended
Fondaparinux 36– 42h Not 6– 12h
prophylaxis* (consider anti- recommended
Xa levels)
Fondaparinux avoid Not 12h
treatment* (consider anti- recommended
Xa levels)
NSaIDs No additional No additional No additional precautions
precautions precautions
aspirin No additional No additional No additional precautions
precautions precautions
Clopidogrel 7d Not 6h
recommended
prasugrel 7d Not 6h
recommended

## 頁面 1132

ReGIONaL aNaeStheSIa aND CO aGuLatION DISORDeRS 1111
Drug Acceptable Administration Acceptable time after block
time after of drug performance or catheter
drug for block while spinal removal for next drug dose
performance or epidural
catheter in
place
ticagrelor 5d Not 6h
recommended
tirofiban 8h Not 6h
recommended
eptifibatide 8h Not 6h
recommended
abciximab 48h Not 6h
recommended
Dipyridamole No additional No additional 6h
precautions precautions
Warfarin INR ≤1.4 Not after catheter removal
recommended
Rivaroxaban 18h Not 6h
prophylaxis* recommended
(CC >30mL/ min)
Rivaroxaban 48h Not 6h
treatment* recommended
(CC >30mL/ min)
Dabigatran 48h Not 6h
prophylaxis or recommended
treatment**
(CC >80mL/
min)
(CC 50– 80mL/ min) 72h Not 6h
recommended
(CC 30– 50mL/ min) 96h Not 6h
recommended
apixaban 24– 48h Not 6h
prophylaxis recommended
(alteplase, anistreplase, reteplase, streptokinase) 10d Not 10d
recommended
* Manufacturer recommends caution with use of neuraxial catheters.
** Manufacturer recommends that neuraxial catheters are not used.
Reprinted with permission from harrop- Griffiths W et al. (2013) Guidelines: regional anaesthesia
and patients with abnormalities of coagulation. Anaesthesia, 68, 966– 72. © 2013 the authors.
anaesthesia published by john Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the association of anaesthetists
of Great Britain and Ireland.

### 表格 1

|  |
| --- |
| Drug Acceptable Administration Acceptable time after block time after of drug performance or catheter drug for block while spinal removal for next drug dose performance or epidural catheter in place |
| ticagrelor 5d Not 6h recommended tirofiban 8h Not 6h recommended eptifibatide 8h Not 6h recommended abciximab 48h Not 6h recommended Dipyridamole No additional No additional 6h precautions precautions Warfarin INR ≤1.4 Not after catheter removal recommended Rivaroxaban 18h Not 6h prophylaxis* recommended (CC >30mL/ min) Rivaroxaban 48h Not 6h treatment* recommended (CC >30mL/ min) Dabigatran 48h Not 6h prophylaxis or recommended treatment** (CC >80mL/ min) (CC 50– 80mL/ min) 72h Not 6h recommended (CC 30– 50mL/ min) 96h Not 6h recommended apixaban 24– 48h Not 6h prophylaxis recommended (alteplase, anistreplase, reteplase, streptokinase) 10d Not 10d recommended |
| * Manufacturer recommends caution with use of neuraxial catheters. ** Manufacturer recommends that neuraxial catheters are not used. Reprinted with permission from harrop- Griffiths W et al. (2013) Guidelines: regional anaesthesia and patients with abnormalities of coagulation. Anaesthesia, 68, 966– 72. © 2013 the authors. anaesthesia published by john Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the association of anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland. |

## 頁面 1133

1112
1112 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Regional anaesthesia and nerve injury
• perioperative peripheral nerve dysfunction is due to many causes
and may even be pre- existing and only noted for the 1st time in
the perioperative period. Intraoperative causes include ischaemia
due to hypotension and vascular occlusion, tourniquets, pressure
from haematomas, thermal injury from electrocautery, poor patient
positioning, retraction or direct surgical trauma. postoperative
causes include oedema, inflammatory neuropathy, compression from
immobilising devices and compartment syndrome. Identifying the cause
with certainty is usually not possible.
• estimates of the incidence of postoperative peripheral nerve
dysfunction associated with regional anaesthesia vary widely, depending
on type of block, time since block, patient factors and symptoms
reported. Minor sensory- only abnormalities during the first few
days after proximal brachial plexus blocks can be as high as 1:10,3
while significant sensory and/ or motor abnormalities persisting for
6– 12mo can occur up to 1:2000.2,3,5 the likelihood of postoperative
nerve dysfunction depends upon many factors, including which nerve
block is performed, how the nerve block is performed, the age of
the patient and their comorbidities. Mechanisms include direct needle
trauma, injectate neurotoxicity and ischaemia from vasoconstriction or
compression. Most perioperative peripheral nerve symptoms are not
related to regional anaesthesia and most fortunately resolve with the
passage of days or weeks.
• Visualisation of the nerves and needle tip with ultrasound allows the
anaesthetist to achieve a very low incidence of needle–n erve contact,
thereby minimising the chances of needle– nerve trauma.
• Intraneural injection (direct injection inside the epineurium of a nerve)
increases the risks of direct needle trauma and injectate neurotoxicity.
It can also be associated with high injection pressures leading to
ischaemic injury. the hallmarks of intraneural injection include low
current thresholds when using a pNS, high injection pressures, pain on
injection, failure of the evoked contractions to disappear at the start of
La injection and swelling of the nerve with separation of fascicles when
visualised with ultrasound. If any of these are encountered, injection
should cease immediately and the needle repositioned.
• publications suggest the interscalene brachial plexus block is the
pNB with the highest incidence of postoperative nerve dysfunction
symptoms.3 Great caution should be exercised when placing a needle
anywhere near the upper reaches of the brachial plexus.
• It appears that children only very rarely suffer nerve injury from regional
anaesthesia and pregnant women undergoing spinal and/o r epidural
anaesthesia also have a very low incidence. Conversely, it appears
that the elderly, obese patients, patients with DM and those with pre-
existing neurological conditions are at a higher risk of nerve damage.
• the management of perioperative peripheral nerve dysfunction
involves its early recognition, discussion with surgeons regarding
possible causes, and if minor sensory changes only, reassurance that
most of these will spontaneously resolve is usually all that is required.
If significant deficits, motor deficits or non- resolving symptoms, referral

## 頁面 1134

ReGIONaL aNaeStheSIa aND NeRVe INjuRY 1113
to a neurologist, nerve conduction studies, MRI and eMG can all assist
in the identification of the severity and location of the injury. there
is little that can be done to hasten the recovery of nerve function or
to minimise the extent of the nerve injury once harmed. If there is
acute compression from a haematoma, especially in the spinal canal,
urgent surgical decompression is indicated. If there is neuropathic pain,
appropriate antineuropathic pain medications should be prescribed.
• Recovery of neurological function is mercifully the norm. More than
90% of cases of neuropathy thought to have resulted from regional
anaesthesia recover within 3mo, and >99% within a year.10
Awake or asleep?
• pNBs are currently performed in awake, sedated or asleep patients.
Controversy exists as to whether performing blocks on anaesthetised
patients places the patient at i risk.
• In theory, awake patients may get symptoms of needle–n erve contact
and warn the anaesthetist before further needle advancement or
injection is performed, possibly averting nerve injury. awake patients
may also complain of early symptoms of La toxicity from inadvertent
intravascular injection, warning the anaesthetist to cease further
injection and possibly averting a major LaSt event.
• however, needle–n erve contact and intraneural injection are known
to not always cause symptoms. patient symptoms cannot therefore
be relied upon and other monitors of needle– nerve contact and
intraneural injection should be used. these are ultrasound visualisation
of intraneural needle tip placement, La injection causing distension of
the nerve with separation of fascicles, low- threshold currents if using
a pNS, failure of evoked contraction disappearance on injection of
the La and difficulty with injection/h igh injection pressure. paediatric
anaesthetists argue that for most of their patients, ‘awake’ is not an
option; they are perhaps fortunate that the incidence of nerve damage
associated with pNBs in children is very low.
• the performance of pNBs on the non-a naesthetised patient need
not be unpleasant for the patient. Many anaesthetists successfully use
sedation with small doses of a benzodiazepine (e.g. midazolam) and/
or an opioid (e.g. fentanyl) or infusions of small amounts of propofol
or remifentanil. the increasing use of ultrasound for nerve location is
known to improve patient comfort if the evoked contractions produced
by nerve stimulators are avoided. It is therefore relatively easy to
perform ultrasound- guided blocks on patients who are lightly sedated.
• While there is currently no hard evidence to support either ‘awake’ or
‘asleep’ pNBs, it seems prudent to perform them in responsive patients
when possible.
(See also % p. 927.)

## 頁面 1135

1114
1114 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Nerve blocks: central neuraxial blocks
Spinal and epidural anatomy
• the spinal cord terminates at 7L1 in adults and at 7L3 in infants.
• the line joining the iliac crests (intercristine or tuffier’s line) is at
7L4 level.
• C7 is the most prominent spinous process; t7 is at the inferior angle of
the scapula level.
• the subarachnoid space ends at 7S2 in adults, and is lower in children.
• the subarachnoid space extends laterally along the nerve roots to the
dorsal root ganglia.
• the subdural space is a potential space between the dura and the
arachnoid.
• the epidural (extradural) space lies between the walls of the vertebral
canal and the spinal dura mater. It is a low- pressure space, occupied by
areolar tissue, loose fat and the internal vertebral venous plexus.
• the ligamentum flavum is thin in the cervical region, reaching maximal
thickness in the lumbar region (2– 5mm).
Spinal block
Indications Lower abdominal surgery (CS, inguinal hernia), lower limb
surgery, perineal surgery.
Landmarks Spinous processes of the lumbar vertebrae and the line joining
the iliac crests (tuffier’s line).
Technique the patient should be sitting or lying on their side. Mark a line
joining the iliac crests. Identify the spinous process at the level of this line.
the nearest interspace at this level is L3/ 4 (there is significant variation).
Spinal blocks should always be carried out caudal to this space to avoid
trauma to the tail end of the spinal cord (the conus).
Midline at the level of the interspace, insert a needle in the midline. With
a 15° cephalad angulation, advance until a click or pop is felt (the dura is
pierced) at an approximate depth of 4– 6cm. after confirming free flow
of CSF, carefully connect the syringe containing the La. aspirate gently
before and after injection to confirm correct placement in CSF throughout
injection. Inject slowly.
Paramedian One to 2cm lateral to the upper border of the spinous process,
insert a needle perpendicular to the skin to contact the lamina of the
vertebra. Withdraw slightly, reinserting the needle 15° medially and 30°
cephalad to pass over the lamina through the interlaminar space. advance
until a click or pop is felt. aspirate and inject as above.
Relative contraindications aS or mitral valve stenosis (hypotension and
inability to compensate by increasing CO). hypovolaemia (hypotension).
previous back surgery (technical difficulty). Neurological disease (i risk
of neurological complications). Systemic sepsis (i incidence of epidural
abscess, meningitis).

## 頁面 1136

NeRVe BLOCKS: CeNtRaL NeuRaXIaL BLOCKS 1115
Absolute contraindications
• Local sepsis
• patient refusal
• anticoagulation (see % pp. 269–75).
Local anaesthetic drugs and doses for spinal anaesthesia
• Dosing of La in adults depends upon age and pregnancy. the older
the patient, the less drug will be needed. this is thought to be due
to degenerative changes of the vertebral column and i sensitivity of
neural tissue to La. pregnant patients need less than their non-p regnant
counterparts, due to epidural vein engorgement compressing the
thecal sac.
• Bupivacaine 0.5% is usually used. ‘heavy’ is hyperbaric and contains 8%
glucose. ‘plain’ is isobaric at body temperature.
• Due to spread to the dependent part of the thoracic kyphosis in the
supine position, hyperbaric solutions can be used to achieve a higher
block and provide an ability to influence height with position changes of
the patient.
• a volume of 2.5–3 .0mL of a hyperbaric solution of La will reach
t6– t10 in most non- pregnant young adults placed in the recumbent
position shortly after spinal injection.
• pregnant patients require less, often 1.8–2 .2mL (see % p. 857).
• the volume of plain La needed tends to be a little higher.
• Lidocaine is associated with a risk of cauda equina syndrome, transient
radicular irritation and transient neurological symptoms.
• Ropivacaine can be used but does not come in a ‘heavy’ preparation
and has a shorter duration of action than bupivacaine.
• Opioids are often added to improve the quality of the block. (See
% p. 1166; table 41.9.)
• ensure any drug preparations intended for intrathecal use do not
contain preservatives.
Clinical tips
• If there is difficulty at L3/ 4, ideally go down, not up, as the level of
termination of the conus is variable. Surface identification of the L3/
4 interspace is inaccurate; 70% of clinicians mark it as a higher space.
ultrasound can be used to improve accuracy.
• a sitting position increases CSF pressure, and hence improves CSF flow
with fine needles. It is also easier to find the midline in obese patients in
this position.
• a lateral position offers patient comfort and the possibility of sedation.
• problems are often due to the lumbar spine not flexed enough, or a
short introducer not inserted enough and a too flexible needle. When
difficulty is encountered in an elderly, osteophytic patient, consider a
22G Quincke- tip needle. pDph is rare in this patient group.
• When hitting bone at a superficial level, this can only be the top of
spinous processes. this is a good sign that you are midline and need to
keep walking the needle cephalad or caudad.

## 頁面 1137

1116
1116 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
• When hitting bone at a deep level, this is more likely to be lamina. ask
the patient to identify on which side you are. If they can identify one
side, you are out of the midline and need to redirect to the opposite
side. If they state ‘middle’, you could be deep on a spinous process and
could continue walking cephalad or caudad, recheck landmarks or try
another level.
Complications
• hypotension (due to sympathetic block), bradycardia (if block extends
to the mid- thoracic region): can progress to cardiac arrest.
• high block (compromising breathing, may extend to ‘total spinal’ with
loss of consciousness, apnoea and cardiorespiratory arrest).
• urinary retention.
• Nerve damage (see % pp. 1112–13).
• pDph (see % pp. 848–51).
• Infection: abscess, meningitis.
• Spinal canal haematoma: more likely in patients with disorders of
coagulation. Can cause spinal cord compression and permanent
paraplegia if not urgently decompressed with laminectomy.
• the serious complications of spinal and epidural anaesthesia have been
the subject of a nationwide audit in the uK— the RCoa’s 3rd National
audit project (Nap3) 2009. the incidence of permanent injury due
to neuraxial blocks was 1:25 000– 1:50 000, with an incidence of death
or paraplegia of 1:50 000– 1:140 000. the incidence of complications
in children, obstetric patients and those undergoing chronic pain
procedures was very low. there was an excess incidence of serious
complications in elderly patients with epidurals used during and after
surgery, and in patients undergoing CSes, a finding supported by other
large studies (M http:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ nap3).
Ultrasound for central neuraxial block
• ultrasound for CNB is usually used to prescan the anatomy and
identify landmarks before performing the procedure. ultrasound allows
identification of the midline, the accurate spinal level, an estimation of
the depth to the ligamentum flavum, the angle of insertion needed to
reach the space and the level with the widest interlaminar space for
needle passage. It can increase success and decrease technical difficulty,
the number of needle reinsertions and redirections and the risk of
traumatic procedures, and may therefore improve safety.11
• While this technique may not be of benefit to all patients, it may be
particularly useful in those with abnormal anatomy or in those whose
bony landmarks are not palpable. It is, however, a difficult skill in the
difficult patient (e.g. morbid obesity) where it is most useful. practice is
required to become competent.
• ultrasound can also be used as a teaching aid as it allows demonstration
of the anatomy by the instructor and confirmation to the student that
they have identified the correct insertion point and maximum depth to
insert the needle (Fig. 40.1).12

## 頁面 1138

NeRVe BLOCKS: CeNtRaL NeuRaXIaL BLOCKS 1117
Fig. 40.1 Low lumbar transverse interlaminar sonoanatomy. erector spinae (e),
psoas (p), interspinous ligament, facet joints and vertebral body (tan), posterior and
anterior complexes (orange), spinal canal (yellow). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
A suggested technique for pre-p rocedural ultrasound
If landmarks cannot be confidently palpated using a low-f requency curvilinear
probe placed transversely over the sacrum, slide the probe cephalad over
the lumbar spine, marking the midline. With the probe then in a parasagittal
plane just off the midline (parasagittal oblique interlaminar view), identify
the sawtooth appearance of the lamina. Starting from the continuous white
line of the sacrum, slide cephalad over the sawtooth pattern of the laminae,
marking spinal levels to accurately identify levels, including L3/4 . at this
level, rotate the probe to a transverse orientation (transverse interlaminar
view) and identify the interspinous ligament between spinous processes.
Small movements of the probe are required. Rock the probe to ensure the
interspinous ligament shadow is vertical on the screen—t his reveals any
rotation of the spine. tilt the probe to identify the anterior complex (anterior
dura and vertebral body) and posterior complex (ligamentum flavum and
dura). Note the depth to the posterior complex as this indicates the depth
to the dura. take account of indentation of the skin from probe pressure.
When the best view of the anterior complex is achieved (this indicates a
bony window to the spinal canal), the direction of the ultrasound beam is the
direction the needle should be inserted. Look at the probe, note any tilt or
angulation, mark the position on the patient by marking the centres of each
side of the probe, remove the probe and draw your crosshairs, marking the
needle insertion site. perform the procedure knowing, at what level you are,
that there is a bony window to the spinal canal, the direction required and
the depth to space.
If landmarks can be confidently palpated the first half of this procedure can
be omitted, and the level selected by palpation. this space can then be
quickly checked with one probe position (transverse interlaminar) for: a
bony window (anterior complex visible), any rotation of the spine (L or
R rocking of probe required to make the interspinous ligament shadow
vertical on the screen), the angle of insertion between the spinous
processes (cephalad or caudad tilt of the probe) and the depth to space
(depth to the posterior complex). put the probe down and perform the
procedure with this extra information.
Epidural block
(See % pp. 841–4; % pp. 855–6; % p. 1103; % pp. 1114; % p. 1157;
% pp. 1164–6.)

## 頁面 1139

1118
1118 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Nerve blocks: neck
Cervical plexus block
Indications analgesia or anaesthesia for carotid surgery and other superficial
neck procedures.
Positioning Lateral, or supine with the patient’s head turned to
contralateral side.
Ultrasound ‘Intermediate’ block of superficial cervical plexus nerves usually
performed. place probe transverse on lateral neck, starting at about
cricoid level. Identify C7 (absent anterior tubercle) and C6 (wide foramen,
prominent anterior tubercle) transverse processes. Slide cephalad,
identifying C5 and C4 (carotid often divides at C4). Block usually performed
at C4 level. Identify lateral border of sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM)
superficially. target is plane between deep border of SCM and deep cervical
fascia (prevertebral fascia) overlying deep muscles. Branches of the cervical
plexus may be seen travelling in this plane from anteromedially, as they leave
the transverse processes, to posterolaterally where they wrap around the
posterior boarder of the SCM. Insert needle Ip from posterior, infiltrating
this plane and surrounding any nerve-l ike structures (Fig. 40.2).12
Fig. 40.2 Cervical plexus sonoanatomy. Cervical plexus (yellow), carotid artery
(red), internal jugular vein (blue), C5 transverse process (tan), muscles (burgundy),
C5 nerve root (R), SCM (S), needle path (white line), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of
Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique ‘Superficial’ block (SC infiltration) usually performed.
the point of injection is at the midpoint of the posterior border of the
SCM. Injection fanned SC cephalad and caudad from this point along the
posterior border of the SCM.
Volume 10– 15mL.
Side effects Nil with SC ‘superficial’ block. Deeper needle insertion during
‘intermediate’ block may result in phrenic, recurrent laryngeal and brachial
plexus nerve block.
Complications Nerve injury, haematoma.
Tips ‘Deep’ cervical plexus block at nerve root depth, at higher cervical
levels, has greater risks and side effects and is rarely indicated.
Caution in severe respiratory compromise or contralateral phrenic palsy
due to risk of phrenic block.

## 頁面 1140

NeRVe BLOCKS: uppeR LIMB 1119
Nerve blocks: upper limb
(See Figs. 40.32, 40.33, 40.34 and 40.36.)
Interscalene brachial plexus block
Indications analgesia for shoulder surgery.
Positioning Lateral, or supine with head turned to contralateral side.
Ultrasound the brachial plexus roots can be visualised lateral to the carotid
and internal jugular between the scalene muscles. the classic ‘traffic lights’
pattern of nerve roots in the interscalene groove usually represents C5
and C6 divided, alternatively C5, C6 and C7. a muscle bridge commonly
exists between C7 and C8, impairing imaging and La spread to C8 and
t1. C7 transverse process is usually deeper than those above and has an
absent anterior tubercle which allows imaging of the vertebral artery and
vein. C6 transverse process is often wide with a prominent anterior tubercle
(Chassaignac’s tubercle). the posterior Ip approach is the most popular,
although anterior and OOp approaches are also used. position the probe in
the transverse plane with the carotid vessels on the edge of the image and the
interscalene groove in the centre. Identify C5, C6 and C7 roots (Fig. 40.3).12
Fig. 40.3 Interscalene brachial plexus sonoanatomy. C5 (5), C6 (6), C7 (7) roots
(yellow), carotid artery (C), internal jugular vein (j), vertebral artery and vein (V), C7
transverse process (tan); muscles (burgundy), scalenus anterior (a), scalenus medius
(M), phrenic nerve (p), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique Insertion point is at the level of the cricoid cartilage
(C6), lateral to the lateral border of the SCM, in the palpable ‘groove’
between the scalenus anterior and the scalenus medius. Direct the needle
towards the contralateral elbow. the nerves are very superficial, a depth of
no greater than 2.5cm.
PNS twitches C5 deltoid, C6 biceps. triceps or pectoralis major contractions
may be acceptable if deltoid or biceps contractions are not found. phrenic
nerve stimulation means the needle is too anterior. Levator scapulae
stimulation indicates the needle is too posterior (on the dorsal scapular nerve).
Volume 10mL with ultrasound technique. traditionally 720mL with landmark
technique.
Side effects phrenic nerve block (up to 100%), subjective dyspnoea,
horner’s syndrome, recurrent laryngeal nerve block causing a hoarse voice.

## 頁面 1141

2110
1120 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Complications Minor paraesthesiae lasting days or weeks are more common
with this block than others; vessel puncture, intravascular injection, intrathecal
or epidural injection, pneumothorax, damage to nerve roots, damage to
dorsal scapular or long thoracic nerve as they pass through middle scalene.
Tips this block should ideally be performed on awake or lightly sedated
patients by experienced clinicians due to risks of serious complications.
avoid in patients with severe respiratory disease and contralateral phrenic
nerve palsy because of phrenic nerve block.
Supraclavicular brachial plexus block
Indications analgesia or anaesthesia for distal humerus, elbow, forearm,
wrist or hand surgery.
Positioning Supine or semi- reclined with head turned to contralateral side.
Ultrasound the brachial plexus is superficial and easily visible as it passes
over the 1st rib, lateral to the subclavian artery. the probe is placed parallel
and cephalad to the clavicle, in the supraclavicular fossa. an Ip technique
with lateral needle entry is most popular. the brachial plexus appears as
a ‘triangular-s haped bunch of grapes’ immediately lateral to the subclavian
artery. If the probe is angled caudad slightly under the clavicle, it is usually
possible to image the plexus and subclavian artery on top of the 1st rib, with
the pleura deep on both sides of the rib shadow. performing the procedure
with this image of the plexus on the rib, rather than on the pleura, reduces
the pneumothorax risk. the dorsal scapular artery may often be seen
passing through the plexus at this level—c heck with colour Doppler
(Fig. 40.4).12
Fig. 40.4 Supraclavicular brachial plexus sonoanatomy. Brachial plexus (yellow),
subclavian artery (red), subclavian vein (blue), pleura and lung (pink), 1st rib (tan),
muscles (burgundy), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 20– 30mL as necessary to surround the plexus.
PNS twitches Finger flexion or extension.
Side effects horner’s syndrome, phrenic nerve block.
Complications pneumothorax, artery puncture, intravascular injection.
paraesthesia is common from needle– nerve contact.

## 頁面 1142

NeRVe BLOCKS: uppeR LIMB 1121
Tips Colour-fl ow Doppler is advised to identify all vessels close to, or passing
through, the plexus. avoid in patients with severe respiratory disease and
contralateral phrenic nerve palsy because of risk of phrenic nerve block.
Injection should include the angle between the artery and the 1st rib (the
‘corner pocket’) to increase success rate of blocking the lower trunk. the
suprascapular nerve (needed for shoulder coverage) has often just left the
plexus at this level and may be seen travelling posterolaterally under the
omohyoid.
Infraclavicular paracoricoid brachial plexus block
Indications analgesia or anaesthesia for elbow, wrist or hand.
Positioning Supine with the arm adducted and resting by the side.
Ultrasound the ultrasound probe should be positioned in a parasagittal
plane just medial to the coracoid process. Deep to the pectoralis muscles,
the axillary artery is seen cephalad to the vein, with the lateral, medial and
posterior cords around the axillary artery. the cords of the brachial plexus
can be deep and difficult to visualise. using an Ip technique from cephalad,
the needle tip should be advanced until it lies posterior to the artery
(Fig. 40.5).12
Fig. 40.5 Infraclavicular paracoricoid brachial plexus sonoanatomy. Brachial plexus
cords (yellow), axillary artery and vein (red, blue), pectoralis major (pM), pectoralis
minor (pm), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique the coracoid process of the scapula may be palpated
inferior to the lateral 3rd of the clavicle. It must be differentiated from
the acromion, which can be palpated as a bony continuation of the distal
clavicle. the point of insertion is 1.5cm medial and 1.5cm caudal to the
most anterior point of the coracoid. the depth can vary between 3cm and
9cm, depending on body mass.
PNS twitches pectoralis major: expected at 1– 2cm depth (needle too
superficial); lateral cord: elbow flexion (do not accept; too lateral); medial
cord: wrist flexion (acceptable); posterior cord: wrist or finger extension
(optimal).

## 頁面 1143

2112
1122 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Volume 20– 30mL.
Side effects Nil.
Complications Vascular puncture, intravascular injection, pneumothorax.
Tips Never angle the needle medially as this can increase the risk of
pneumothorax.
Axillary brachial plexus block
Indications anaesthesia for hand surgery; analgesia for forearm, wrist or
hand surgery.
Positioning Supine with the arm abducted to 90°.
Ultrasound the ultrasound probe should be positioned high in the axilla
along the axillary crease, imaging the axillary artery in short axis. three
nerves sit adjacent to the artery. the median nerve is usually superficial and
anterior, the ulnar nerve superficial and posterior, the radial nerve deep and
posterior. the musculocutaneous nerve is more anterior, most commonly
in the plane between the biceps and the coracobrachialis, or in the body of
the coracobrachialis (Fig. 40.6).12
Fig. 40.6 axillary brachial plexus sonoanatomy. Median nerve (M), ulnar nerve (u),
radial nerve (R), musculocutaneous nerve (Mc), axillary artery and compressed veins
(red, blue), humerus (tan), coracobrachialis (C), triceps (t), needle path (white), La
spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
PNS twitches Radial: thumb, wrist or finger extension; ulnar: adduction of
the thumb, little finger flexion; median: finger and wrist flexion and pronation
of the wrist; musculocutaneous: biceps and brachialis contraction.
Volume 20mL.
Complications artery puncture (compress for 5min if it occurs), intravascular
injection.
Tips highly variable anatomy exists. Following the nerves up from their
location in the arm may help with identification in the axilla. there may be
multiple veins, usually compressed by probe pressure. Great care should
be exercised to avoid IV injection of La. aspirate and ensure La spread in
tissues is observed with injection.

## 頁面 1144

NeRVe BLOCKS: uppeR LIMB 1123
Suprascapular nerve block, posterior approach
Indications analgesia of shoulder, as part of multimodal analgesia for
arthroscopic shoulder surgery or when interscalene block contraindicated.
Often combined with other nerve blocks, e.g. axillary nerve.
Positioning Sitting or lateral.
Ultrasound place the probe parallel and immediately cephalad to the spine
of the scapula. tilt probe caudad to image floor of the suprascapular fossa,
deep to the trapezius and supraspinatus. Slide probe laterally until ‘hockey
stick’ appearance of lateral end of the suprascapular fossa. the nerve and
artery run in a fascial compartment deep to the supraspinatus. artery
sometimes seen; nerve rarely seen (Fig. 40.7).12
Fig. 40.7 Suprascapular nerve sonoanatomy. Suprascapular nerve (yellow),
suprascapular artery (red), suprascapular fossa (tan), trapezius (t), supraspinatus (S),
needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
PNS twitches Supraspinatus and infraspinatus.
Volume 10mL.
Complications arterial puncture.
Tips Nerve often not seen, but fascial compartment deep to the
supraspinatus easily seen and filled with La. Can be deep in muscular
patients, impairing imaging. Bone backstop aids safety. If the probe is tilted
cephalad, the suprascapular notch may be imaged (break in continuous
white line of suprascapular fossa bone). Do not perform block in notch as
this increases the risk of pneumothorax.
Axillary nerve block
Indications analgesia of shoulder. Innervates anterior joint, deltoid and
overlying skin. usually combined with suprascapular nerve block for
arthroscopic shoulder surgery or when interscalene contraindicated.
Positioning Sitting or lateral.
PNS twitches anterior deltoid.

## 頁面 1145

2114
1124 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Ultrasound the probe is placed in a parasagittal plane over posterolateral
humeral neck. the posterior circumflex humeral vessels are identified
coursing around the neck of the humerus. the nerve is often not seen but
runs in proximity to (usually cephalad to) the vessels, deep to the deltoid,
distal to teres minor insertion, proximal to triceps insertion (Fig. 40.8).12
Fig. 40.8 axillary nerve sonoanatomy. axillary nerve (yellow), posterior circumflex
humeral vessels (red, blue), humerus (tan); deltoid (D), teres minor (t), needle path
(white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 10mL.
Complications Vessel puncture.
Tips Needle can be inserted from cephalad or caudad end of probe.
Intercostobrachial nerve block
Indications anaesthesia of skin to upper medial arm. Commonly added
to brachial plexus blocks for vascular surgery at aCF that may extend
proximally to medial aspect of arm or for tourniquet tolerance.
Positioning arm abducted 90°.
Ultrasound place probe transversely in axillary crease to image axillary
vessels. Slide probe posteriorly, placing vessels on anterior edge of image.
Insert needle Ip from anterior to infiltrate from vessels posteriorly and
superficial to deep fascia of arm (superficial to muscles). Nerve not easily
identified. Infiltrate plane and surround any nerve-l ike structures.
Landmark technique palpate axillary artery in axillary crease. perform SC
infiltration from artery posteriorly.
Complications Vessel puncture.
Tips Intercostobrachial nerve block can also be achieved via a high
superficial serratus anterior plane block; however, more volume will be
required.
Median, ulnar and radial nerve blocks in the forearm
Indications anaesthesia or analgesia of hand.
Positioning Supine with arm abducted 90°.
Ultrasound allows these nerves to be blocked anywhere along their course
from the axilla to the wrist.

## 頁面 1146

NeRVe BLOCKS: uppeR LIMB 1125
Median nerve Commonly traced proximally from carpel tunnel and blocked
mid forearm between superficial and deep flexor digitorums. alternatively,
in the aCF, it sits medial and slightly deep to the brachial artery between
the brachialis and pronator teres. In the medial aspect of the upper arm, it
is superficial, adjacent to the brachial artery (Fig. 40.9).12
Fig. 40.9 Median nerve mid- forearm sonoanatomy. Median nerve (yellow), ulnar
and radial arteries (red), ulnar and radius (tan), deep flexor digitorum (D), superficial
flexor digitorum (S), flexor carpi radialis (F), needle path (white), La spread
(cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Radial nerve Commonly blocked in lateral aspect of distal upper arm where
it leaves the spiral groove of the humerus and travels in the plane between
the brachialis and brachioradialis before dividing into superficial and deep
branches around the level of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus (Fig.
40.10).12
Fig. 40.10 Radial nerve aCF sonoanatomy. Radial nerve (yellow), brachial artery
(red), cephalic and cubital veins (blue), brachioradialis (Br), brachialis (B), needle path
(white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Ulnar nerve Commonly traced up from the medial wrist where it is found
adjacent to the ulnar artery. the nerve and artery separate from each
other two- thirds of the way up the forearm, which is a commonly blocked
location. alternatively, in the medial aspect of the upper arm, it is superficial
and posterior to the brachial artery and median nerve where it courses with
the ulnar collateral vessels before passing deep towards the cubital tunnel
of the elbow (Fig. 40.11).12

## 頁面 1147

2116
1126 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Fig. 40.11 ulnar nerve mid- forearm sonoanatomy. ulnar nerve (u), ulnar artery
(red), ulnar (tan); deep flexor digitorum (D), superficial flexor digitorum (S), flexor
carpi ulnaris (F), median nerve (M), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy
of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique
Median nerve position the patient with their arm slightly abducted, elbow
slightly flexed and forearm supinated. Feel the brachial artery at the
antecubital fossa crease. the median nerve lies medial and deep to the ar-
tery. a pop may be felt on passing through the fascial plane to reach the
nerve. It usually lies at 1– 2cm depth.
Radial nerve position as above. Radial nerve lies between the insertion of
the biceps and brachioradialis, proximal to the flexor crease in the aCF. It is
slightly deeper than the median nerve at 2– 4cm depth.
Ulnar nerve the elbow should be slightly flexed, with the arm abducted
at the shoulder and externally rotated to expose the ulnar groove at the
elbow, or with the hand on the contralateral shoulder and arm across the
chest. the ulnar nerve lies in the groove between the medial epicondyle of
the humerus and the olecranon process. pressure neurapraxia may develop
from blocking at the groove, so the point of injection is often 2–3 cm
proximal to this, at a depth of 1– 3cm.
PNS twitches
Radial thumb, wrist or finger extension.
Ulnar adduction of the thumb, little finger flexion.
Median Finger and wrist flexion and pronation of the wrist.
Volume 5mL per nerve.
Complications artery puncture.
Wrist block
Indications analgesia or anaesthesia for hand surgery.
Landmark technique
Median nerve passes between the palmaris longus (look for the tendon
in the middle of the wrist when clenching the fist and flexing the wrist)
and the flexor carpi radialis. Inject 2– 3cm proximal to the wrist creases, at
71cm depth

## 頁面 1148

NeRVe BLOCKS: uppeR LIMB 1127
Ulnar nerve Runs between the ulnar artery and flexor carpi ulnaris, deep to
both. Inject 1– 2cm proximal from the wrist creases from the ulnar side of
the wrist towards the radius underneath the flexor carpi ulnaris, 1cm depth.
Radial nerve Becomes SC 3– 5cm proximal to wrist joint. Can be blocked by
infiltrating SC 72– 3cm proximal to the anatomical snuffbox at the base of
the thumb over the dorsum of the radius.
Tips avoid median nerve block and wrist block in patients with carpal tunnel
syndrome.
Digital (ring) block
Indications Distal finger or toe surgery.
Landmark technique the nerves run on either side of the phalanges, two on
the palmar side and two on the dorsal side of each finger.
• Insert a 25G needle just distal to the metacarpophalangeal joint from
the dorsal side (less painful), past the proximal phalanx on either side of
the finger to be blocked.
• Inject 2– 4mL of La (non- adrenaline- containing) on either side, while
withdrawing the needle.
Complications Vascular puncture, digital ischaemia.
Intravenous regional anaesthesia— Bier’s block
Indications anaesthesia for superficial arm surgery or fracture reduction.
Maximum operation length limited to about 30min. Can be used for
lower limb.
Technique Measure the patient’s Bp. Insert one IV cannula into the limb
requiring surgery, and one into another limb. apply a double- or single-
cuff tourniquet to the upper arm. Reliable arterial compression cannot be
obtained over the forearm as vessels will be held open between the radius
and ulna. the limb should be exsanguinated with a compression bandage or
by elevation if fractured. the cuff should then be inflated to 50–1 00mmhg
above the patient’s systolic Bp. a non-a drenaline- containing La with low
systemic toxicity, such as prilocaine 0.5%, should be used. Inject slowly:
40mL for small, 50mL for medium and 60mL for a large arm. alternatively,
lidocaine 0.5% can be used, maximum dose 250mg. Other Las are not
appropriate. the patient should be warned that the arm will begin to feel
warm and appear mottled. Surgery can start within a few minutes. On no
account should the tourniquet cuff be deflated before 15min for prilocaine
and 20min for lidocaine. potentially devastating systemic toxicity can occur if
large volumes of La are released before it becomes bound or metabolised.
If tourniquet pain is experienced during the procedure and a double cuff
is used, the distal cuff can be inflated before deflating the proximal cuff.
the tissue under the distal cuff should be anaesthetised at this stage. the
technique is contraindicated if pre-e xisting circulatory difficulties, e.g. crush
injury, homozygous SCD, peripheral vascular disease. a reliable tourniquet
and resuscitation equipment are essential.
Complications LaSt.

## 頁面 1149

2118
1128 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Nerve blocks: trunk
(See Fig. 40.36.)
Anatomy of the nerve supply to the thorax and abdomen
the muscles and skin of the chest and abdomen are supplied by the spinal
nerves t2– t12, with a contribution from L1 in the inguinal region. these
mixed spinal nerves emerge from the intervertebral foramen into the
paravertebral space, dividing into the dorsal and ventral rami. the dorsal
rami supply the deep muscles and skin over the dorsum of the trunk. the
ventral rami form the intercostal nerves, which pass into the neurovascular
plane between the internal and innermost intercostal muscles. a lateral cu-
taneous branch is given off before the costal angle, piercing the intercostal
and overlying muscles in the mid-a xillary line. the intercostal nerves end as
an anterior cutaneous nerve.
Thoracic paravertebral block
Indications analgesia for breast surgery, thoracic surgery, open
cholecystectomy, renal surgery or fractured ribs.
Positioning Sitting or lateral.
Ultrasound Imaging the paravertebral space is difficult due to depth and
predominance of bone shadows and is recommended for experienced
practitioners.
• With the probe in the sagittal plane over midline spinous processes,
slide laterally to identify transverse processes. too far laterally and
curved ribs with the pleura between will be easily imaged. Slide
back medially and the pleura and ribs disappear deep and the more
superficial, squared- off appearance of the transverse processes come
into view. tilting the probe laterally will help to image the pleura as it
dives deep under the transverse processes (Fig. 40.12).12
Fig. 40.12 thoracic paravertebral sagittal view. pleura and lung (pink), superior
costotransverse ligament (orange), transverse processes (superficial, tan) rib necks
(deep, tan), trapezius (t), erector spinae (e), needle path (white), La spread
(cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
• alternatively, with the probe in the transverse orientation, the spinous
process can be placed on the edge of the image and the contour of the
lamina rising to the transverse process can be imaged with the bone
shadow deep to it. Lateral to the transverse process, the pleura or
rib are imaged. Slide or tilt the probe off the rib to image the pleura

## 頁面 1150

NeRVe BLOCKS: tRuNK 1129
disappearing under the transverse process. the innermost intercostal
membrane can be imaged as it extends from adjacent to the pleura to
the transverse process (Fig. 40.13).12
Fig. 40.13 thoracic paravertebral transverse view. pleura and lung (pink),
innermost intercostal membrane (orange), spinous process and transverse process
(tan), trapezius (t), erector spinae (es), external intercostal muscle (e), needle path
(white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
• Following identification of relevant sagittal or transverse sonoanatomy
as above, an Ip or OOp needle approach can be used. Needle imaging
is difficult due to the steep angle of insertion. use bony landmarks and
hydrolocation to identify the needle tip. Depression of the pleura with
injection is a positive sign of correct needle tip placement.
• alternatively, the transverse process location and depth can be marked
with ultrasound and then the landmark technique used.
Landmark technique palpate the spinous processes. the needle insertion
point is 2.5cm lateral to the cephalad aspect of the spinous process at the
desired block level. the needle should be inserted to contact the transverse
process usually at a depth of 2–4 cm; note the depth at which this occurs.
after contact with bone, withdraw the needle slightly and change the angle
such that the needle will pass cephalad to the transverse process. at this
point, a loss of resistance technique can be used, or the needle can be
simply inserted 1cm further than the depth at which the transverse process
was first encountered. aspirate to exclude blood or air before injecting
the La.
Volume 5mL per level or 20mL at a single level.
Side effects epidural spread, sympathetic block.
Complications pneumothorax, La toxicity, intravascular injection.
Tips to reduce the risk of pneumothorax, try to keep the needle tip in
the ultrasound image at all times. If imaging or block performance is too
difficult to ensure safe practice, an alternative and more superficial block,
e.g. erector spinae plane or retrolaminar, may be chosen.

## 頁面 1151

3110
1130 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Erector spinae plane block
Indications Still being clarified by clinical trials. Consider for chest wall
analgesia, e.g. rib fractures, thoracotomy, breast surgery, when paravertebral
risk considered too great, or too difficult to perform.
Positioning Sitting or lateral.
Ultrasound With the probe in the sagittal plane over midline spinous
processes, slide laterally to identify the transverse processes. too far
laterally and the curved surface of the ribs with the pleura between will be
easily imaged. Slide back medially and the pleura and ribs disappear deep and
the more superficial, squared- off appearance of the transverse processes
come into view. the muscles immediately superficial to the transverse
processes are the erector spinae. Insert the needle Ip from the caudad end
of the probe. aim for the cephalad side of the transverse process. hit bone
and pull back a touch or advance past the cephalad edge of the transverse
process, injecting a small amount to identify the opening of the correct
fascial plane between the erector spinae and the transverse process. the
La should open an elliptical fascial plane space in the cephalad– caudad
direction when correctly positioned (Fig. 40.14).12
Fig. 40.14 erector spinae sonoanatomy. pleura and lung (pink), transverse
processes (tan), trapezius (t), rhomboids (R), erector spinae (e), needle path
(white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 20– 30mL.
Complications pneumothorax, La toxicity, sympathetic block, epidural
spread.
Tips Can be performed bilaterally and at multiple levels.
a useful option if paravertebral considered too difficult.
Pectoserratus plane (PSP) and interpectoral plane (IPP)
blocks
Indications analgesia to breast, axilla, pectoral muscles and anterolateral
chest wall.
Positioning Supine with arm abducted 45– 90°.

## 頁面 1152

NeRVe BLOCKS: tRuNK 1131
Ultrasound place probe in a parasagittal orientation in deltopectoral groove
just below clavicle. Identify pectoralis major and minor. Rotate distal end of
probe laterally towards axilla 30–4 5°. Slide probe inferolaterally along the
direction it is pointing towards the axilla. Identify serratus anterior deep
to pectoralis minor and immediately superficial to ribs. the target planes
are between the two pectoral muscles and between pectoralis minor and
serratus anterior. Insert needle from cephalad end of probe to deposit La
in these planes (Fig. 40.15).12
Fig. 40.15 pSp and Ipp sonoanatomy. pleura and lung (pink), ribs (tan), pectoralis
major (pM), pectoralis minor (pm), serratus anterior (S), needle path (white), La
spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 20– 30mL.
Side effects Some surgeons have objected to pSp and Ipp for breast cancer
surgery as La tracks to the axilla, distorting fascial planes and there is a risk
of needle trauma to malignant nodes.
Complications Vessel puncture, pneumothorax, LaSt.
Tips Ipp block involves placing La between the pectoralis major and minor
only. this only blocks the medial and lateral pectoral nerves innervating the
pectoral muscles. useful for breast implants or pacemaker insertions that
are deep to pectoralis major. pSp and Ipp also blocks the lateral cutaneous
branches of the intercostal nerves, providing analgesia to the anterolateral
chest wall, the intercostobrachial nerve innervating the axilla and the long
thoracic nerve innervating the serratus anterior.
Ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric block
Indications analgesia for inguinal hernia, orchidopexy or hydrocele surgery.
Positioning Supine.
Ultrasound the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves are branches of the
lumbar plexus. the nerves run initially in the tap before piercing first the
internal oblique (IO) and then the external oblique (eO) muscles to provide
sensory innervation over the lower abdomen and upper thigh. ultrasound
can be used to identify the correct planes, or it may be possible to locate
specific nerves. place the probe between the aSIS and the umbilicus, and
scan caudally. Blood vessels may lie with the nerves and aid in identification.
use an Ip technique with the needle from either end of the probe. the
nerves most commonly lie between the transversus abdominis (ta) and IO,
but variations are common (Fig. 40.16).12

## 頁面 1153

3112
1132 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Fig. 40.16 Ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves sonoanatomy. external oblique (e),
internal oblique (I), transversus abdominis (t), iliacus (IL), ilium (tan), peritoneum
(green), ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves (yellow), needle path (white), La
spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique the classical technique relies on performing a plane
block between the ta and IO and between the IO and eO to block the
ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves, respectively. the point of needle
insertion is 2cm medial to the aSIS. Inject after the 1st pop; insert the
needle deeper and inject after the 2nd pop.
LA dose 5– 10mL in each plane.
Side effects Femoral nerve block.
Complications puncture of bowel, intravascular injection.
Tips Nerves often close to ilium at aSIS level; they will travel medially as
you scan caudally.
Penile block
Indications Circumcision.
Landmarks palpate the symphysis pubis above the root of the penis. Insert
a 25G needle at the lateral base of the shaft of the penis to just touch
the inferior border of the pubis. When contact is made, withdraw slightly;
change the needle angle to pass just beneath the pubis— a pop may be felt
at 1– 2cm when Buck’s fascia is pierced. If an assistant pulls down slightly
on the end of the penis, the passage through the fascia will become more
apparent. Inject 5mL (or 0.1mL/k g of bupivacaine 0.5% in children); repeat
on the other side. performing an additional infiltration SC around the
root of the penis onto the scrotum blocks input from the ilioinguinal and
genitofemoral nerves but increases the risk of bleeding.
Complications haematoma.
Tips Never use adrenaline-c ontaining solutions. a caudal block may be
easier and a more appropriate analgesia for circumcision in infants. If
stimulation is noted during the surgery, ask the surgeon to supplement the
block (most commonly around the frenulum).

## 頁面 1154

NeRVe BLOCKS: tRuNK 1133
Midaxillary transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block
Indications analgesia for incisions to the lower abdominal wall.
Ultrasound place the ultrasound probe on the lateral abdominal wall
between the costal margin and the iliac crest to image in the transverse
plane. Identify the three muscle layers (eO, IO and ta). the ta is usually
the thinnest and the most hypoechoic layer. Deep to the ta, intraperitoneal
structures will be seen moving. an Ip technique with the needle coming
from the anterior is used. the target plane is between the IO and the ta
(Fig. 40.17).12
Fig. 40.17 Midaxillary tap sonoanatomy. peritoneum and intraperitoneal (green),
external oblique (e), internal oblique (I), transversus abdominis (t), needle path
(white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique Classically, the block is performed in the triangle of
petit, which is located above the iliac crest, with the eO muscle forming the
anterior border and the latissimus dorsi the posterior border. the eO is
still present as fascia in this area, so two pops should be felt as the needle
passes perpendicular to the skin, just above the iliac crest, before injection
of the La.
Volume 20– 30mL per side.
Complications puncture of bowel, intrahepatic or intrasplenic injection, LaSt.
Tips Be careful with La dose when performing this bilateral large-v olume
block. a subcostal tap block can also be performed to cover incisions from
t8 to t10.
Rectus sheath block
Indications analgesia for upper midline abdominal incisions.
Ultrasound place the probe in a transverse orientation on the anterior
abdominal wall at or above the umbilicus level, depending on incision
location. Identify the three lateral muscle layers, the linear semilunaris,
the rectus muscle and the peritoneum. the target plane is immediately
superficial to the posterior rectus sheath. use an Ip technique from lateral
to inject between the rectus muscle and the posterior rectus sheath
(Fig. 40.18).12

## 頁面 1155

3114
1134 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Fig. 40.18 Rectus sheath block sonoanatomy. peritoneum and intraperitoneal
(green), linear semilunaris (orange), rectus abdominis (R), external oblique (e),
internal oblique (I), transversus abdominis (t), needle path (white), La spread
(cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique to perform the block, four points should be marked
at 5cm cephalad/ 5cm lateral and 5cm caudad/5 cm lateral on each side of
the umbilicus. a short bevelled or blunted 22G needle should be inserted
through the skin and SC tissue. the 1st fascial plane is the anterior rectus
sheath. a scratch technique of wiggling the needle against the resistance
(and feeling a ‘scratching’ sensation) may make it more apparent before
‘popping’ through the plane. the needle should then be inserted until a
2nd resistance is felt, but no further, and 10–1 5mL injected. the technique
should be repeated at the other three locations.
Volume 20– 30mL per side.
Complications Bowel puncture, LaSt.
Tips Beware of superior epigastric vessels running in this plane, often seen
with ultrasound. perform bilaterally for midline incisions. Not possible on
lower abdomen below arcuate line due to absence of posterior rectus
sheath.

## 頁面 1156

NeRVe BLOCKS: LOWeR LIMB 1135
Nerve blocks: lower limb
(See Figs. 40.35 and 40.36.)
Fascia iliaca block
Indications popular analgesia for patients suffering from a fractured neck of
the femur, analgesia for hip surgery, femur and anterior and lateral thigh.
Positioning Supine. Flatten the bed as much as possible to open any flexing
of the hip. tilt the whole bed head- up if the patient requires some head- up
positioning rather than flexing in the middle.
Ultrasound two techniques described.
Infrainguinal as per femoral nerve block (see % p. 1136), with the aim of
identifying the fascia iliaca and placing the La under the fascia iliaca a few cm
lateral to the neurovascular bundle.
Suprainguinal the probe is placed over the aSIS in a parasagittal orientation.
Slide the probe inferomedially along the inguinal ligament towards the pubic
symphysis. after a few cm, the anterior inferior iliac spine should be seen
as a peaked hyperechoic shape. Overlying this is the iliacus muscle with
the eO muscle superficial and cephalad and the sartorius superficial and
caudad, together making a ‘bow- tie’ appearance. the fascia iliaca is the
hyperechoic fascial layer covering the superficial surface of the iliacus. the
deep circumflex iliac vessels are usually seen superficial to the fascia iliaca in
the pelvis. Insert the needle from the caudad end of the probe, aiming for
La to spread under the fascia iliaca, deep to deep circumflex iliac vessels, in
a cephalad direction (Fig. 40.19).12
Landmark technique Find the junction of the middle and lateral thirds of the
inguinal ligament, joining the aSIS and the pubic tubercle. Move 2cm distal
and 2cm lateral. the aim is to be lateral to the neurovascular bundle. the
needle needs to pass through the fascia lata (1st pop) and fascia iliaca (2nd
pop). a large blunt needle, e.g. tuohy, will facilitate feeling the pops.
Volume 30– 40mL.
Complications Vascular puncture, nerve injury, LaSt intraperitoneal
injection.
Tips Reliably blocks the femoral nerve and usually the lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve.
Fig. 40.19 Suprainguinal fascia iliaca sonoanatomy. Fascia iliaca (orange), deep
circumflex iliac vessels (red, blue), anterior inferior iliac spine (tan), internal oblique
(IO), sartorius (S), iliacus (I), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark
Fairley.

## 頁面 1157

3116
1136 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Femoral nerve block
Indications analgesia for hip, knee or femoral shaft surgery. Combined with
sciatic nerve block to produce anaesthesia or analgesia for surgery to the
lower leg.
Positioning Supine. Flatten the bed as much as possible to open any flexing
of the hip. tilt the whole bed head- up if the patient requires some head- up
positioning rather than flexing in the middle.
Ultrasound place the probe in a transverse orientation in the inguinal
crease over the femoral vessels. Identify the femoral vein and artery. Stay
as proximal as possible. If the femoral artery has divided, you are usually
too distal. Immediately deep and lateral to the artery, you will see a large
hypoechoic muscle— the iliopsoas. On the superficial surface of the
iliopsoas is a bright hyperechoic fascia, the fascia iliaca, that runs medially
deep under the artery. a more superficial fascia that runs superficial to the
artery is the fascia lata. the femoral nerve is usually seen as a flattened,
hyperechoic honeycomb structure between the iliacus and the fascia iliaca
lateral to the artery. tilting the probe is often required due to anisotropy
of the nerve. advance the needle from the lateral end of the probe to
penetrate the fascia iliaca at the lateral edge of the nerve. La can be placed
above and/o r below the nerve or just below the fascia iliaca lateral to the
artery if nerve not seen (Fig. 40.20).12
Fig. 40.20 Femoral nerve sonoanatomy. Femoral nerve (yellow), femoral artery
and vein (red, blue), fascia iliaca (orange), iliopsoas (Ip), pectineus (p), needle path
(white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique palpate the femoral artery beneath the inguinal
ligament; 71– 1.5cm lateral to this is the femoral nerve. Insert the needle
1cm distal to the ligament; two ‘pops’ may be felt as the needle passes the
fascia lata, then the fascia iliaca. Depth to nerve of 2– 4cm.
PNS twitches patella dance.
Volume 10– 20mL.
Complications arterial puncture, intravascular injection, nerve injury.
Tips Imaging difficulty often due to scanning too distally. the femoral nerve
quickly flattens and divides a few cm distal to the inguinal ligament. In obese
patients, an assistant may be required to retract abdominal pannus.

## 頁面 1158

NeRVe BLOCKS: LOWeR LIMB 1137
PENG block
Indications analgesia of hip joint. this is a new block still needing clinical
trials to clarify indications.
Ultrasound place transverse probe over aSIS. Scan caudally and medially a
few cm to image the anterior inferior iliac spine. Rotate medial end of probe
45° and tilt caudally to image the ilium from the anterior inferior iliac spine
to the iliopubic eminence as a continuous hyperechoic line. too distal and
the femoral head and joint space will be imaged. Identify femoral vessels and
femoral nerve. psoas tendon is often seen as a hyperechoic area deep in
psoas muscle. Insert needle from lateral end of probe. target is plane deep
to psoas and psoas tendon immediately anterior to bone between anterior
inferior iliac spine and iliopubic eminence (Fig. 40.21).12
Fig. 40.21 peNG block sonoanatomy. Femoral artery (red), femoral vein
(blue), femoral nerve (yellow), psoas muscle and tendon (p), iliacus (I), ilium from
anterior inferior iliac spine to iliopubic eminence (tan), needle path (white), La
(cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 10– 20mL.
Complications Vessel puncture, femoral nerve injury, bladder or ureter injury.
Tips If the femoral head is imaged, you are too distal and need to slide
the probe proximally to image the ilium from anterior inferior iliac spine to
iliopubic eminence.
Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve
Indications analgesia for incisions on lateral thigh.
Ultrasound place the probe transversely just distal to the aSIS and slide a
few cm caudally. Identify the sartorius medially as the most superficial, more
echogenic, boat-s haped muscle. Laterally is the tensor fascia lata. Superficially
between the two is often a small, triangular, fat-fi lled compartment containing
the small hyperechoic nerve. the nerve often divides as it is traced distally and
usually runs superficial to the sartorius as it is traced proximally. the needle
can be passed Ip from the lateral end of the probe or OOp (Fig. 40.22).12
Landmark technique the nerve runs under the inguinal ligament, just
medial to the aSIS and superficially over the sartorius muscle. the nerve
can be blocked 2cm medial and 2cm caudal to the aSIS. Insert the needle
perpendicular to the skin to a depth of 1–3 cm, until you feel the needle pass
through the fascia lata, and inject here.

## 頁面 1159

3118
1138 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Fig. 40.22 Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve sonoanatomy. Sartorius (S), tensor
fascia lata (t), rectus femoris (R), lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (yellow), fat-
filled triangular fascial compartment (orange), needle path (white), La spread
(cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 5– 10mL.
Complications Nerve injury.
Tips If you are unable to visualise the nerve, you can infiltrate the plane
superficial to the sartorius, just distal to the aSIS where the nerve
usually runs.
Subgluteal sciatic nerve block
Indications Rarely indicated as more distal block usually preferred. analgesia
for ankle or foot surgery, or for lower limb amputation. Combined with
femoral nerve block for analgesia of the leg.
Ultrasound place a curvilinear probe midway between the greater
trochanter and ischial tuberosity in an oblique transverse orientation.
Identify the gluteus maximus superficially, the greater trochanter laterally,
the ischial tuberosity medially and the quadratus femoris deep. the sciatic
nerve is usually a flattened hyperechoic structure in the fascial plane joining
these two bony landmarks deep to the gluteus maximus, superficial to the
quadratus femoris. Nerve stimulation is helpful in confirming nerve location.
Ip needle from lateral side (Fig. 40.23).12
Fig. 40.23 Subgluteal sciatic sonoanatomy. Sciatic nerve (yellow), gluteus maximus
(G), quadratus femoris (Q), femur (F), ischium (I), needle path (white), La spread
(cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.

## 頁面 1160

NeRVe BLOCKS: LOWeR LIMB 1139
Landmark technique position the patient in the Sims’ position/r ecovery
position, with the operative leg uppermost. Identify and mark the posterior
superior iliac spine (pSIS), the greater trochanter of the femur and the sacral
hiatus. Draw a line between the pSIS and greater trochanter, and between
the greater trochanter and sacral hiatus. Draw a 3rd line perpendicular from
the midpoint between the pSIS and greater trochanter to intersect the 2nd
line. this is the point of needle insertion perpendicular to the skin to a
depth of 5– 10cm.
PNS twitches tibial component—p lantar flexion of the foot (optimal);
common peroneal component—e version and dorsiflexion of the foot
(withdraw the needle and aim more medially); gluteal muscles— direct
stimulation, needle too shallow.
Volume 15– 20mL.
Complications Intravascular injection, nerve injury.
Tips Nerve can be difficult to see due to depth, anisotropy and sometimes
a very flattened nerve in the fascial plane. Care with La maximum doses if
performing with femoral or other blocks.
Popliteal sciatic nerve block
Indications Very popular for foot, ankle and lower leg surgery. Covers
everything below the knee, except skin on the medial leg, including medial
malleolus periosteum (saphenous nerve).
Positioning Lateral preferred, but can be performed supine or prone.
Ultrasound place the probe transversely in the popliteal fossa. Identify the
popliteal vessels and the tibial nerve superficial to the vessels. trace the
tibial nerve proximally to identify the smaller common peroneal nerve
coming from the lateral side to join the tibial nerve usually about 10cm
(highly variable) above the popliteal crease. Block usually performed where
the two nerves are first enclosed in a common sheath (Fig. 40.24).12
Fig. 40.24 popliteal sciatic sonoanatomy. tibial nerve (t), common peroneal nerve
(C), popliteal artery and vein (red, blue), biceps femoris (B), semimembranosus (S),
needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.

## 頁面 1161

4110
1140 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Landmark technique Lateral approach, supine, with the knee slightly flexed,
mark the groove between the vastus lateralis (above) and biceps femoris
(below). Draw a line down from the superior border of the patella where
it crosses this groove. Insert a 22G 100mm needle, directed posteriorly
25– 30° and slightly caudally. the needle passes through the biceps femoris
into the popliteal fossa, initially encountering the common peroneal nerve,
then the tibial nerve.
PNS twitches Common peroneal nerve, f oot dorsiflexion and eversion; tibial
nerve, foot plantarflexion and inversion.
Volume 20mL.
Tips If this junction location is too deep and imaging poor (due to obesity),
the nerves can be blocked more distally where they are more superficial
and easily imaged as two separate nerves. Branches to the sural nerve may
have come off and be missed if too distal. anisotropy is prominent with
these nerves; tilt probe to maximise brightness of nerve.
Saphenous nerve block
Indications provides analgesia for the medial lower leg and ankle.
usually combined with popliteal sciatic to complete coverage of lower
leg and ankle.
Ultrasound the saphenous nerve is small and difficult to image in the leg. the
adductor canal block is therefore usually performed.
Landmark technique the patient should be supine, with the leg externally
rotated. Identify the tibial tuberosity and inject 10–1 5mL SC from the tibial
tuberosity towards the medial tibial condyle.
Adductor canal and distal femoral triangle blocks
Indication usually performed to achieve saphenous nerve and nerve to
vastus medialis block for total knee replacement or combined with popliteal
sciatic to complete lower leg coverage.
Positioning Supine with hip slightly flexed and externally rotated.
Ultrasound place probe transversely over anteromedial aspect of mid thigh.
Identify the femoral artery with the sartorius muscle superficial to it. the
sartorius is usually a small, boat-s haped muscle slightly more echogenic
than other muscles. the target is the area lateral to the artery deep to the
vasoadductor membrane (bright fascial plane between the sartorius and
the artery). the saphenous nerve is sometimes able to be visualised in this
location. pass the needle Ip from the lateral end of the probe (Fig. 40.25).12
Volume 10mL.
Complications artery puncture.
Tips ensure La spreads deep to vasoadductor membrane lateral to artery.
usually performed at mid thigh level which is usually a distal femoral triangle
block. Sliding more distally becomes an adductor canal block which blocks
saphenous nerve only.

## 頁面 1162

NeRVe BLOCKS: LOWeR LIMB 1141
Fig. 40.25 adductor canal sonoanatomy. Saphenous nerve (yellow), superficial
femoral artery and vein (red, blue), sartorius (S), vastus medialis (V), adductor
magnus (a), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
iPACK block
Indication posterior capsule analgesia for total knee replacement, often
combined with distal femoral triangle or adductor canal block for motor-
sparing analgesia.
Positioning Supine, hip flexed and externally rotated, knee slightly flexed.
Ultrasound place curvilinear probe over medial aspect of distal thigh
just above level of proximal patella. Identify femur and popliteal artery.
target plane is between artery and femur. Slide probe posteriorly into a
posteromedial location, so needle trajectory is parallel to posterior surface
of femur. Insert needle from medial end of probe, and advance between
femur and popliteal artery until 2cm lateral to artery. Inject a few mL here
and remainder while withdrawing to infiltrate plane between artery and
femur (Fig. 40.26).12
Fig. 40.26 ipaCK block sonoanatomy. Femur (tan), popliteal artery and vein (red,
blue), sartorius (S), semimembranosus (Sm), biceps femoris (B), vastus medialis (V),
needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Volume 10– 20mL.
Complications artery puncture, tibial or common peroneal nerve block.
Tips easily combined with distal femoral triangle or adductor canal block.

## 頁面 1163

4112
1142 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Ankle block
Indications analgesia or anaesthesia to the foot.
Positioning Depending on the nerve to be blocked, position as convenient in
figure 4 position, supine or lateral.
Ultrasound
• the tibial nerve is blocked first due to slowest onset. place probe
proximal to medial malleolus between tibia and achilles tendon. Identify
posterior tibial artery and veins. the tibial nerve usually lies posterior to
vessels lying on the flexor hallucis longus muscle and sheath. the flexor
hallucis longus tendon within the muscle should not be confused with
the nerve. trace these structures proximal and distal to confirm their
identity. pass needle Ip from posterior end of probe (Fig. 40.27).12
Fig. 40.27 tibial nerve ankle sonoanatomy. tibial nerve (yellow), posterior tibial
artery and veins (red, blue), great saphenous vein (S), tibialis posterior tendon (t),
flexor digitorum longus (D), flexor hallucis longus (h), tibia medial malleolus (tan),
needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
• the saphenous nerve is usually the most difficult to image. place the
probe transversely over the anteromedial ankle with light pressure (or
use a tourniquet) to identify the greater saphenous vein. Slide the probe
proximally and distally on the vein to identify the saphenous nerve
running in close proximity. It may be divided around the vein. pass the
needle from the posterior end of the probe to surround the vein if
nerve not identified (Fig. 40.28).12
Fig. 40.28 Saphenous nerve ankle sonoanatomy. tibia medial malleolus (tan),
posterior tibial vessels and tibial nerve (p), great saphenous vein (S), saphenous nerve
(yellow), flexor digitorum longus (D), tibialis posterior (t), flexor hallucis longus (h),
needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.

## 頁面 1164

NeRVe BLOCKS: LOWeR LIMB 1143
• the deep peroneal nerve is identified with the probe transversely
positioned over the anterior ankle joint. Identify the anterior tibial
artery. trace the artery proximally and back distally to identify the deep
peroneal nerve as a small hypoechoic circle or a string of circles passing
over the artery from medial to lateral. pass the needle Ip from medial
or lateral, depending on the position of the nerve relative to the artery
(Fig. 40.29).12
Fig. 40.29 Deep peroneal nerve ankle sonoanatomy. tibia (tan), deep peroneal
nerve (yellow), anterior tibial artery and veins (red and blue), tibialis anterior (t),
extensor hallucis longus (h), extensor digitorum longus (D), needle path (white), La
spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
• the superficial peroneal nerve is found with the probe transverse on
the lateral aspect of the fibula. Scan from middle third to distal third,
looking for peaking of the bony contour of the fibula pointing to the
intermuscular fascial plane between the peroneus brevis posteriorly and
the extensor digitorum longus anteriorly. the superficial peroneal nerve
is usually seen exiting this intermuscular plane to continue distally in the
SC plane. pass the needle Ip from anterior or posterior (Fig. 40.30).12
Fig. 40.30 Superficial peroneal nerve sonoanatomy. Fibula (tan), tibialis anterior (t),
extensor digitorum longus (D), peroneus longus and brevis (p), superficial peroneal
nerve (yellow), needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.

## 頁面 1165

4114
1144 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
• the sural nerve can be blocked by placing the probe transversely over
the posterolateral leg just proximal to the lateral malleolus. Identify
the peroneus brevis anteriorly, the achilles tendon posteriorly and the
lessor saphenous vein in the fascial plane between them. use light probe
pressure to avoid squashing the vein. the nerve is difficult to see but is
usually near the vein. the nerve can be traced from mid-p osterior calf
where it exits the deeper planes between the medial and lateral heads
of the gastrocnemius and then travels laterally in the SC tissues towards
the lateral malleolus. pass the needle Ip from anterior or posterior,
surrounding the vein if nerve not seen (Fig. 40.31).12
Fig. 40.31 Sural nerve ankle sonoanatomy. Fibula (tan), peroneus brevis (p), flexor
hallucis longus (h), soleus (S), lesser saphenous vein (blue), sural nerve (yellow),
needle path (white), La spread (cyan). Courtesy of Mark Fairley.
Landmark technique palpate the tibial artery posterior to the medial
malleolus. to block the tibial nerve, inject just behind the tibial artery.
the saphenous nerve is usually blocked by infiltrating a ring of 5mL of La
from the medial malleolus anteriorly to the tibial ridge. to block the deep
peroneal nerve, palpate the dorsalis pedis artery and insert the needle
just lateral to the artery. When contact is made with bone, withdraw the
needle slightly and inject. to block the sural nerve, raise an SC wheal of La
from the lateral malleolus inferiorly to the achilles tendon. the superficial
peroneal nerve can be blocked by infiltrating 10mL SC medially and laterally
over the dorsum of the foot, 2– 3cm distal to the intermalleolar line.
Volume With ultrasound identification of nerves, 2– 5mL each is usually
enough. With the landmark technique and SC infiltration, 5– 10mL each is
often required.
Side effects Five injections can be painful in awake patients. use a fine
needle.
Complications arterial puncture, nerve injury.
Tips a proximal tourniquet during ultrasound- guided block helps with vein
filling and identification. For forefoot surgery, saphenous nerve block not
required.

## 頁面 1166

ReSOuRCeS 1145
Resources
Illustrations
• Sensory innervation (Figs. 40.32– 40.35)
• Cutaneous dermatomes (Fig. 40.36).
Websites
• american Society of Regional anesthesia and pain Medicine (aSRa).
M https:// www.asra.com/
• european Society of Regional anaesthesia and pain therapy (eSRa).
M https:// esraeurope.org/
• New York School of Regional anesthesia (NYSORa).
M https:// www.nysora.com/
• Regional anaesthesia united Kingdom (Ra- uK).
M https:// www.ra- uk.org/
• ultrasound for Regional anesthesia. M http:// www.usra.ca
Mobile applications
• AnSo Anaesthesia Sonoanatomy. Sumo enterprises pty Ltd. 15- 1- 2020.
Version 1.1. apple app Store. M https:// apps.apple.com/ au/ app/
anso- anaesthesia- sonoanatomy/ id1202779264
• Regional anesthesia Reference. university of Washington. 6- 3- 20. Version
2.1.1. apple app Store. Google play. M https:// play.google.com/
store/ apps/ details?id=com.awalters.regionalanestheiaatlas&hl=en
• Echo Blocks. WaveWeb. 6- 3- 20. Version 1.0.5. apple app Store.
M https:// waveweb.pt/ echoblocksapp/
YouTube channels
• Ki- jinn Chin. M https:// www.youtube.com/ channel/
uC8oN4lw8d7uGzhaRRrGZjiQ
• Vicente Roqués escolar. M https:// www.youtube.com/ channel/
uCd6XsctpV0qK4DDevfM3saQ
• LSORa Videos. M https:// www.youtube.com/ channel/ uCV8d6B_
W6KmpoL_ bWXeYiqQ
References
1 turbitt LR, Mariano eR, el- Boghdadly K (2020). Future directions in regional anaesthesia: not just
for the cognoscenti. Anaesthesia, 75, 293– 7.
2 Neal jM, Brull R, orn j-L , et al. (2016). the Second american Society of Regional anesthesia and
pain Medicine evidence-b ased medicine assessment of ultrasound-g uided regional anesthesia:
executive summary. Reg Anesth Pain Med, 41, 181– 94.
3 Neal jM (2016). ultrasound-g uided regional anesthesia and patient safety update of an evidence-
based analysis. Reg Anesth Pain Med, 41, 195– 204.
4 Desai N, albrecht e, ei- Boghdadly (2019). perineural adjuncts for peripheral nerve block. BJA
Educ, 19, 276– 82.
5 Marhofer p, harrop- Griffiths W, Kettner SC, Kirchmair L (2010). Fifteen years of ultrasound
guidance in regional anaesthesia: part 1. Br J Anaesth, 104, 538– 46.
6 Ilfeld BM (2017). Continuous peripheral nerve blocks: an update of the published evidence and
comparison with novel, alternative analgesic modalities. Anesth Analg, 124, 308– 35.
7 horlocker tt, Vandermeuelen e, Kopp SL, et al. (2018). Regional anesthesia in the patient re-
ceiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic therapy: american Society of Regional anesthesia and
pain Medicine evidence- Based Guidelines (Fourth edition). Reg Anesth Pain Med, 43, 263– 309.
8 tsui BCh, Kirkham K, Kwofie MK, et al. (2019). practice advisory on the bleeding risks for periph-
eral nerve and interfascial plane blockade: evidence review and expert consensus. Can J Anesth,
66, 1356– 84.

## 頁面 1167

4116
1146 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
9 Working party; association of anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland; Obstetric anaesthetists'
association; Regional anaesthesia uK (2013). Regional anaesthesia and patients with abnormal-
ities of coagulation: the association of anaesthetists of Great Britain & Ireland the Obstetric
anaesthetists' association Regional anaesthesia uK. Anaesthesia, 68, 966– 72.
10 Lalkhen aG, Bhatia K (2011). perioperative peripheral nerve injuries. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit
Care Pain, 12, 38– 42.
11 perlas a, Chaparro Le, Chin Kj (2016). Lumbar neuraxial ultrasound for spinal and epidural anes-
thesia. Reg Anesth Pain Med, 41, 251– 60.
12 Sumo enterprises pty Ltd. AnSo Anaesthesia Sonoanatomy. 15- 1- 2020. Version 1.1. apple app
Store. M https:// apps.apple.com/ au/ app/ anso- anaesthesia- sonoanatomy/ id1202779264
Declaration of interest
the author is the producer of the AnSo Anaesthesia Sonoanatomy mobile application.
Cutaneous Sensory Distribution
Fig. 40.32 arm cutaneous sensory innervation. Copyright american Society of Regional
anesthesia and pain Medicine. used with permission. all rights reserved.

## 頁面 1168

ReSOuRCeS 1147
Muscluar Sensory Distribution
Fig. 40.33 arm muscular sensory innervation. Copyright american Society of Regional
anesthesia and pain Medicine. used with permission. all rights reserved.
Osseous Sensory Distribution
Fig. 40.34 arm osseous sensory innervation. Copyright american Society of Regional
anesthesia and pain Medicine. used with permission. all rights reserved.

## 頁面 1169

4118
1148 ChapteR 40 Regional anaesthesia
Fig. 40.35 Leg sensory innervation. Copyright american Society of Regional anesthesia
and pain Medicine. used with permission. all rights reserved.

## 頁面 1170

ReSOuRCeS 1149
CC88
CC22
CC33
TT11 CC33 CC44
CC55
CC66
CC77
CC44 CC88
CC55 TT11
TT22
TT11 TT33
TT22 TT TT 44 55
TT22 TT33 TT66
TT33 TT44 TT TT 77 99
TT TT 44 55 TT TT 66 55 TT TT TT 11 11 99 00 11
TT66 TT77 TT1122
TT77 TT99 LL11
LL LL 11 22 T T T T T T T T 1 1 1 1 8 9 8 9 0 1 0 1 TT TT TT 11 11 99 00 11 LL LL L L L L 55 33 2 4 2 4
LL33 TT1122 SS11
LL44 TT1122 SS22
LL11 SS44
SS22SS11 CC55 SS22 SS33 SS55
CC77CC88 LL22
LL55 SS11 SS22 LL11
LL33 LL22
LL44
LL33
SS11 LL55 LL44
SS11 SS22
LL55 LL55 LL44
Fig. 40.36 Cutaneous dermatomes. Reproduced with permission of Oxford publishing
Limited through pLSclear from McLeod G, et al. (2012) Principles and Practice of Regional
Anaesthesia, with permission from Oxford university press. Copyright © Oxford university
press, 2012.

## 頁面 1171

5110