# Chapter 41: Acute pain 急性疼痛


*Source: pages 1172-1201*


## 頁面 1172

Chapter 41 1151
Acute pain
Adrian Dashfield
Introduction 1152
Analgesic drugs 1155
Patient- controlled analgesia 1162
Epidural analgesia 1164
Continuous peripheral nerve blockade 1167
Abdominal wall blocks 1168
Stimulation- produced analgesia: transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation and acupuncture 1169
Non- opioid adjuvant analgesic drugs 1170
Long- term opioid use and the opioid- dependent patient 1176
Specific patient groups 1179
David Kibblewhite
Persistent pain patients in acute pain 1173

## 頁面 1173

5112
1152 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Introduction
Problems with inadequate acute pain management
Kehlet1 identified the aim of postoperative pain relief was firstly to provide
subjective comfort, secondly to reduce the magnitude of the surgical stress
response and thirdly: ‘to enhance restoration of function by allowing the
patient to breathe, cough and move easily’. Severe postoperative pain and
the stress response to surgery cause i morbidity and mortality.
• CVS: tachycardia, hypertension and i peripheral vascular resistance
cause i myocardial O consumption/ demand and myocardial ischaemia.
2
Altered regional blood flow (sympathetic stimulation), reduced mobility,
venous stasis and i clotting cause venous thrombosis.
• respiratory system: abdominal/ thoracic pain results in diaphragmatic
splinting and weakened cough. reduction in lung volumes, atelectasis
and sputum retention cause chest infections and hypoxaemia.
• GI: delayed gastric emptying and reduced intestinal motility. this can be
a direct effect of pain or as a side effect of opioids and surgery.
• Genitourinary: urinary retention.
• Metabolic/ endocrine: release of vasopressin, aldosterone, renin,
angiotensin, cortisol, glucagon, growth hormone and catecholamines
and reduction in insulin and testosterone lead to i protein breakdown,
impairment of wound healing/i mmune function, Na+ and water
retention, i fibrinogen and platelet activation and i metabolic rate.
• Chronic pain: there is increasing evidence that patients who suffer from
acute pain are more likely to develop chronic pain.
• Psychological: poor acute pain management can lead to patient anxiety,
sleeplessness, fatigue and distress well into the postoperative period.
• Cancer survival: surgical stress produces an environment that favours
tumour growth and metastasis.
• Despite these insights, there remains compelling evidence that pain
after surgery is often poorly managed, and up to 40% of patients report
severe pain that negatively impacts on their recovery.2
Measurement of pain
Verbal rating scales Stratify pain intensity according to commonly used
adjectives such as ‘mild’, ‘moderate’ and ‘severe’. they are widely applied
and easy for patients to use. the semiquantitative nature makes them less
suitable for research purposes.
Numerical rating scales take the two extremes of the pain experience and
have a numerical scale in between ‘no pain’ and ‘worst imaginable’, for
example. these scales are robust, reproducible and easy for patients to
understand. A disadvantage is that a digital scale reduces the capacity to
detect subtle changes, as the digits act as anchoring points.
Visual analogue scales Similar to numerical rating scales, with two extremes
of the pain experience on either end of the scale. the patient is asked to
mark across a line of standard length (usually 100mm). the distance along
this line is used. the continuous data generated make analysis easier than
with verbal or numerical rating scales.

## 頁面 1174

INtrODuCtION 1153
Currently, pain assessment tends to be linked to the delivery of analgesic
drugs with the aim of reducing subjective pain scores. routine use of pain
scores that promote restoration of function has not been widely adopted
and no scoring tools have been validated. An alternative, simplified 3- point
functional activity score has been developed by Scott and McDonald3 and is:
• A: no limitation of (relevant) activity because of pain
• B: mild limitation of activity because of pain
• C: unable to complete activity because of pain.
this simple score utilises functional ability to determine pain relief.
World Health Organization analgesic ladder
In 1986, WhO proposed the analgesic ladder (Fig. 41.1). It was intended to
be logical, safe and applicable to many different types of pain, and consists
of drugs which are easily available in most countries.

## 頁面 1175

5114
1154 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
eveirter
/1863711
/smaertstib
/tser
/sir
i/tni.ohw.sppa
//:sptth
M
morf
atad
:ecruoS
.reddal
ciseglana
OhW
eht
1.14
.giF

## 頁面 1176

ANALGESIC DruGS 1155
Analgesic drugs
Paracetamol
the action of paracetamol is via a number of central mechanisms, including
effects on prostaglandin production and serotonergic, opioid, NO and can-
nabinoid pathways. Analgesic and antipyretic, without anti-i nflammatory
activity. Excreted renally after glucuronide and sulphate conjugation in the
liver. A hepatotoxic metabolite N- acetyl- p- benzoquinoneimine is normally
inactivated by conjugation with hepatic glutathione. In paracetamol over-
dose, this pathway is overwhelmed, leading to hepatic cell necrosis. toxicity
may occur in certain patients, even within the recommended dose range,
because of altered metabolism.
• usually given PO or Pr, but available as an IV preparation. Particularly
effective when administered IV.
• recommended dose 4g/ d in adults. Most effective when prescribed
regularly, rather than PrN. the MhrA licensed dose of paracetamol
is the same for all routes of administration in adults over 50kg. In
July 2010, the MhrA issued a Drug Safety update for dosing IV
paracetamol in neonates, infants and children, following a number of
cases of accidental overdose. the dose in children weighing ≤10kg is
now 7.5mg/ kg (>10kg: 15mg/ kg).
Non- steroidal anti- inflammatory drugs
Analgesic, anti- inflammatory, antiplatelet and antipyretic actions are due to
inhibition of the enzyme COX, and consequently the synthesis of prosta-
glandins, prostacyclins and thromboxane A from arachidonic acid.
2
• two types of COX: COX-1 is normally present in the kidney, GI
mucosa and platelets where prostaglandin contributes to normal organ
function. COX- 2 is associated with inflammatory mediators following
tissue damage. COX- 2 inhibitors may be associated with fewer adverse
effects than COX- 1.
• NSAIDs have some central, as well as peripheral, activity. Absorption
from the upper GI tract is rapid. Metabolised in the liver, excreted in the
kidney.
• Opioid- sparing effect of between 20% and 40%. May be used as the
sole analgesic for mild to moderate pain. Side effects with NSAIDs are
relatively common.
• the VIGOr study,4 in which patients on low- dose aspirin were
excluded, found an i risk of MI for patients given rofecoxib, compared
to naproxen. rofecoxib and some other COX- 2 inhibitors have been
withdrawn from clinical practice because of further concerns about the
risks of CVS events, including MI and CVE. Celecoxib and etoricoxib
remain available in the uK for the relief of pain in osteoarthritis, rA and
ankylosing spondylitis. IV parecoxib remains a useful analgesic drug in
the perioperative period.
• In January 2010, the MhrA assessed the i thrombotic risk at three
additional events per 1000 patient-y ears. the i risk relates mainly
to MI and includes CVE and peripheral events in some studies. For
the majority of patients, the potential increase in the thrombotic risk
is small. In patients with pre- existing risk factors for, or a history of,
cerebrovascular disease, the risk may be higher (table 41.1).

## 頁面 1177

5116
1156 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Table 41.1 NSAID prescribing
Prescribe with caution in Contraindications to Contraindications to NSAIDs
patients with COX- 2 inhibitors
history of GI ulceration IhD Active or recurrent (≥2) GI
or high risk of adverse Inflammatory bleeding or ulceration
GI events bowel disease history of NSAID- induced
Cerebrovascular disease Peripheral arterial GI bleed or ulceration
Coagulation disorders disease Known hypersensitivity to
hypertension Cerebrovascular NSAIDs, including aspirin
DM disease Severe hepatic impairment
Smokers CCF (NYhA II–I V) (albumin <25g/ L)
Connective tissue Severe heart failure
disorders Severe renal impairment
IhD (eGFr <30mL/ min/ 1.73m2)
Peripheral arterial disease
hepatic, renal and cardiac
impairment
Women trying to
conceive
Elderly
NICE Guidelines 2019. M https:// cks.nice.org.uk/ nsaids- prescribing- issues#!scenario
• the effect of conventional NSAIDs and coxibs on bone healing
is unclear. After a fracture, COX-2 results in local release of
prostaglandins as part of the acute inflammatory response, which
plays a role in the induction of osteoblasts to promote bone healing.
Ketorolac has been linked to higher non-u nion rates after spinal fusion
surgery, but studies are often of poor quality and design. there is no
robust scientific evidence to discard the use of NSAIDs or coxibs in
patients suffering from a fracture, especially if prescribed for a short
period of time, to treat acute pain.
Inhalational analgesia
Ideal for procedures of short duration such as dressing changes, removal of
drains, labour and application of traction.
• Entonox® (50% NO, 50% O) is a quick- acting, potent analgesic of
2 2
short duration which relies on self- administration. Side effects include
drowsiness, nausea, excitability and augmentation of respiratory
depressant drugs. rapid diffusion increases volume of gas- containing
cavities. Contraindications thus include pneumothorax, decompression
sickness, intoxication, bowel obstruction, bullous emphysema and head
injury.
• Isonox® (isoflurane 0.2– 0.75% in Entonox®). Lower concentrations of
isoflurane produce less drowsiness.5
• Penthrox® (methoxyflurane) is a volatile anaesthetic which is analgesic at
low concentrations and supplied in a handheld, single-u se inhaler device
containing 3mL of liquid agent. Often used in prehospital care and EDs.
Caution in renal impairment. Avoid daily use due to nephrotoxicity of
fluoride ions.

## 頁面 1178

ANALGESIC DruGS 1157
Opioids
Opioid drugs act as agonists at opioid receptors, found mainly in the brain
and spinal cord, but also peripherally. the opioid system comprises four
types of receptor: mu- , delta- and kappa- opioid and nociceptin. Opioid
receptors all have selective endogenous peptides. Analgesia elicited by
clinically applied opioids act predominantly via the mu-o pioid receptor.
tolerance to mu- opioid receptor analgesics may be attenuated by both
nociceptin and delta- opioid receptor antagonism.
Morphine remains the gold standard against which all new analgesics are
compared. It is the least lipid- soluble opioid in common use. Metabolised in
the liver, with only 10% excreted unchanged by the kidney. the metabolite
morphine- 6- glucuronide is more potent than morphine. the other main
metabolite is morphine- 3- glucuronide which has no analgesic activity.
Both metabolites are excreted in the kidney. Accumulation can occur after
prolonged use in patients with impaired renal function. Dose ranges and
dose intervals vary according to the route of administration.
Diamorphine A prodrug (diacetylmorphine) rapidly hydrolysed to 6-
monoacetylmorphine and then morphine. Diamorphine is much more
lipid- soluble than morphine and thus has a more rapid onset of action than
morphine when given by epidural or IV route.
Fentanyl highly lipid-s oluble synthetic opioid with a short duration of action
because of rapid tissue uptake. the high lipid solubility makes it suitable for
transdermal administration. Metabolites of fentanyl are inactive. Fentanyl is
commonly administered IV, epidurally, intrathecally, buccally or via the nasal
mucosa as a spray.
Pethidine Analgesic with anticholinergic and some LA activity. Primarily
metabolised in the liver, with metabolites excreted in the kidney. One of the
main metabolites is norpethidine with a half-l ife of 15–2 0h. Norpethidine is
a potent analgesic. high blood concentrations can lead to CNS excitation.
Patients with impaired renal function are at risk. Pethidine can be used to
treat postoperative shivering associated with volatile anaesthetic agents and
epidural and spinal anaesthesia.
Codeine A prodrug for morphine. usually administered for the treatment
of mild to moderate pain. About 10% of the dose is converted to
morphine. Metabolism to morphine requires an enzyme (CYP2D6) which
is part of the cytochrome P450 system; 8– 10% of Caucasians lack this
enzyme, obtaining little or no benefit. this variable metabolism results in
an unpredictable analgesic efficacy, a high NNt and a concurrent risk of
inadvertent overdose. Subsequently, codeine is not recommended for use
in children, pregnancy or breastfeeding mothers.
Tramadol Synthetic, centrally acting opioid- like drug. Less than half of its
analgesic activity is at the mu-o pioid receptor. It inhibits noradrenaline
and serotonin uptake at nerve terminals. Lower tolerance and abuse
potential, less respiratory depression and constipation reported, compared
to other opioids. Metabolised in the liver and excreted in the kidney. the
main metabolite of tramadol is O-d esmethyltramadol (M1) which is more
potent. Formation of M1 also depends on the presence of CYP2D6 within
the cytochrome P450 system.

## 頁面 1179

5118
1158 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
All opioids are equianalgesic if adjustments are made for the dose and
route of administration. Allowance should be made for long- term opioid
therapy, incomplete cross-t olerance between opioids, differing half-l ives
and interpatient variability (table 41.2).
Opioids have a similar spectrum of side effects. there is considerable
interpatient variability, and some patients may suffer from more side effects
with one particular drug compared to another.
Side effects include respiratory depression (d rr and V and irregular
T
respiratory rhythm), sedation, euphoria, dysphoria, nausea and vomiting,
muscle rigidity, miosis, bradycardia, myocardial depression, vasodilation,
delayed gastric emptying, constipation and pruritus.
Table 41.2 Equianalgesic dosages
Opioid IM/ IV (mg) PO (mg)
Morphine 10 25
Diamorphine 5 –
Fentanyl 0.15– 0.2 –
Pethidine 100 250
Codeine – 175
tramadol 100 100
Opioid antagonists Act at all opioid receptors. Naloxone is the most
commonly used. By titrating the dose of naloxone administered, it is
possible to reverse side effects such as respiratory depression, nausea and
vomiting and sedation, without antagonising the analgesic effects. It must be
remembered that naloxone is effective for about 60min.
Routes of administration
Oral
Oral bioavailability of most opioids is limited due to 1st- pass metabolism.
the slower onset and longer duration of controlled-r elease formulations
make rapid titration impossible. Immediate-r elease PO opioids (e.g. mor-
phine syrup, oxycodone) are preferred for early management of acute pain.
PO fentanyl should be restricted to treating breakthrough pain in patients
receiving opioid therapy for chronic cancer pain.
Intermittent SC or IM opioids traditional route of administration ordered 4-
hourly PrN. A reluctance to give opioids more frequently than 4-h ourly
often leads to failure of regimens. Blood levels of an opioid need to reach
a minimum effective analgesic concentration before any relief of pain is
perceived. this requires an adequate initial dose. the only way to achieve
good pain relief is to titrate the dose of opioid for each patient.
Intermittent IV opioid to achieve sustained pain relief without excessive
drowsiness and respiratory depression, small doses of opioids should be
given often. this technique of opioid administration is suitable for recovery
wards, but not for routine maintenance of analgesia by untrained staff.
Commonly used regimens are 1–3 mg of morphine or 20–6 0 micrograms
of fentanyl every 5min, until the patient is comfortable. Morphine can take
up to 15min to exhibit its full effect.

## 頁面 1180

ANALGESIC DruGS 1159
Continuous IV infusion to avoid peaks and troughs in blood opioid
concentrations associated with intermittent administration, continuous
opioid infusions are sometimes used. Close observation and monitoring of
the patient is essential. Patients are best made comfortable with IV boluses
to ‘load’ the patient.
Intrathecal opioids Intrathecal opioids are administered at the same time as
the intrathecal LA during spinal anaesthesia. Fentanyl 10–3 0 micrograms
has a rapid onset (10–2 0min) and a short duration of action (4–6 h). After
a single administration, it can be used in day case arthroscopic surgery to
enhance analgesia, without prolonging hospital stay. Diamorphine 0.3–
0.4mg is used for analgesia after an elective CS. Doses of up to 1mg of
diamorphine have been used. Intrathecal morphine 0.1–0 .2mg has been
shown to give good postoperative pain relief following hip arthroplasty;
0.3– 0.5mg of morphine similarly provides good postoperative relief
following knee arthroplasty.
Intranasal diamorphine Very effective in children (>1y) needing acute
analgesia. A suitable dosing regime is 0.1mg/ kg in 0.2mL of 0.9% sodium
chloride (0.1mL to each nostril). to prepare the solution, add 10mg of
diamorphine to 20/ weight (kg) of 0.9% sodium chloride (mL), and draw up
0.2mL. Fentanyl nasal spray is available as a 50- microgram or 100- microgram
metered spray. use should be restricted to treating breakthrough pain in
patients receiving opioid therapy for chronic cancer pain.
Transmucosal administration Fentanyl lollipops (PO transmucosal fentanyl
citrate) allow absorption from the oral mucosa. More frequently used
for anaesthetic premedication in children. Can be used for breakthrough
analgesia in opioid- tolerant patients with cancer.
Transdermal administration Very lipid- soluble opioids are absorbed through
the skin. Fentanyl patches are available in five sizes (12–1 00 micrograms/h ),
and patches are replaced every 72h. Buprenorphine patches are available as
low- dose 7d- release patches or in higher-d ose patches replaced every 72h.
Steady plasma concentrations occur, on average, 12h after application of
the transdermal patch. Dangerously high plasma concentrations can occur
if patients are actively warmed while wearing a transdermal patch. Although
not suitable for acute pain management, the recommended dose in chronic
pain, based on the daily parenteral morphine dose, is shown in tables 41.3
and 41.4.
the Oxford league table of analgesic efficacy is a helpful synthesis of all
the available evidence about the relative efficacy of commonly used anal-
gesics. An extract of the league table is provided in table 41.5.
Acute opioid toxicity results in opioid- induced ventilatory impair-
ment. Comorbidity and co-a dministration of other sedating drugs (e.g.
gabapentinoids, benzodiazepines, other opioids) increases the risk of harm.
In 2017, the uK MhrA issued a safety alert on the dangers of concomitant
use of gabapentin with opioids and mandated that these patients should be
carefully observed for signs of respiratory depression. As a result, sedation
scoring should now be mandatory for all patients receiving opioids and the
concomitant use of other sedative agents avoided where possible.

## 頁面 1181

6110
1160 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Table 41.3 transdermal fentanyl vs morphine
Transdermal fentanyl dose PO morphine dose in 24h Parenteral morphine dose
(micrograms/ h) (mg) in 24h (mg)
12 30 4– 11
25 60 8– 22
50 120 23– 37
75 180 38– 52
100 240 53– 67
125 450 68– 82
150 540 83– 97
Table 41.4 transdermal buprenorphine vs morphine
Transdermal buprenorphine dose PO morphine Parenteral morphine dose
(micrograms/ h) dose in 24h (mg) in 24h (mg)
5 12 1– 3
10 24 2– 5
20 48 4– 9
35 84 6– 15
52.5 126 8– 22
70 168 14– 22
there is universal acceptance that a global prescribed opioid crisis exists
and it is timely for clinicians to reflect on their role in potentially facilitating
this crisis. there is some evidence that reducing the duration of discharge
medication prescriptions may reduce the incidence of subsequent opioid
dependence.6 Modified- release opioid preparations have been identified as
one of the main causes of the prescribed opioid crisis and ideally should be
avoided in the management of post-s urgical pain in the opioid-n aïve surgical
patient. If an institution does decide to use modified- release preparations
in perioperative pain management, they should be strictly dose- and time-
limited and must not be included in discharge medication.

## 頁面 1182

ANALGESIC DruGS 1161
Table 41.5 the Oxford league table of analgesic efficacy
Analgesic NNT Lower Higher CI
CI
Diclofenac 100mg 1.8 1.6 2.1
Paracetamol 1000mg + codeine 60mg 2.2 1.7 2.9
Parecoxib 40mg (IV) 2.2 1.8 2.7
Diclofenac 50mg 2.7 2.4 3.1
Ibuprofen 600mg 1.7 1.4 2.3
Ibuprofen 400mg 2.5 2.4 2.7
Ketorolac 10mg 2.6 2.3 3.1
Paracetamol 650mg + tramadol 75mg 2.6 2.3 3.0
Ibuprofen 200mg 2.7 2.5 2.9
Diclofenac 25mg 2.6 2.2 3.3
Pethidine 100mg (IM) 2.9 2.3 3.9
Morphine 10mg (IM) 2.9 2.6 3.6
Parecoxib 20mg (IV) 3.0 2.3 4.1
Ketorolac 30mg (IM) 3.4 2.5 4.9
Paracetamol 500mg 3.5 2.2 13.3
Paracetamol 1000mg 3.8 3.4 4.4
Paracetamol 600/ 650mg + codeine 60mg 4.2 3.4 5.3
Aspirin 600/ 650mg 4.4 4.0 4.9
tramadol 100mg 4.8 3.8 6.1
tramadol 75mg 5.3 3.9 8.2
Paracetamol 300mg + codeine 30mg 5.7 4.0 9.8
tramadol 50mg 8.3 6.0 13.0
Codeine 60mg 16.7 11.0 48.0
CI, confidence interval; NNt, number needed to treat.
Source: data from M http:// www.bandolier.org.uk/ booth/ painpag/ Acutrev/ Analgesics/ lftab.
htm

## 頁面 1183

6112
1162 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Patient- controlled analgesia
PCA refers to self-a dministration of IV opioids and helps overcome the
marked variability in response to postoperative opioids. Patients titrate their
plasma opioid concentration to remain in the analgesic window (above the
minimum effective analgesic concentration and below the minimum toxic
concentration). the inherent safety of PCA lies in the fact that excessive
doses of opioid will not be delivered, should the patient become sedated.
No one but the patient is allowed to operate the PCA demand button.
Patient- controlled analgesia regimens
• the most commonly used opioid is morphine. Fentanyl, pethidine,
tramadol and other opioids have also been used. No opioid is
noticeably superior to any other, although a greater incidence of
pruritus may be seen with morphine; on an individual basis, one opioid
may be better tolerated than another.
• the optimal bolus dose consistently results in analgesia without side
effects. Initial values for PCA variables are given in table 41.6.
• For paediatric use of PCA, see % pp. 926–7.
Table 41.6 PCA regimes
PCA variable Drug and dose Comments
Loading dose 0mg Patients should be comfortable
before starting PCA
Bolus dose Morphine 1mg Patients over the age of 70y
Pethidine 10mg may require half this amount
Fentanyl 20 micrograms
Diamorphine 0.5mg
tramadol 10mg
Concentration Varies, depending on pumps Should be standardised in
used and hospital protocols hospital protocols for each drug
Lockout interval 5min is usual
Background 0mg/ h If used, the background infusion
infusion rate (mg/ h) usually should not
exceed the bolus dose (mg)
Dose limit 30mg morphine or No clear opinion on how this
equivalent in 4h facility should be used. Often no
dose limit is set
Complications
• Equipment malfunction is rare. Interference in pump operation has been
reported following current surges and static electricity. Modern PCA
pumps have a number of fail- safe design features where the program
defaults to the lowest setting possible for a bolus dose. Most machines
have a battery backup lasting up to 8h. Failure of antireflux valves has
led to cases of respiratory depression.

## 頁面 1184

PAtIENt-CONtrOLLED ANALGESIA 1163
• Operator error is much more common. Programming errors, use
of the wrong drug or incorrect drug concentrations and incorrect
background infusions have all been reported and have led to fatalities
due to respiratory depression.
Troubleshooting
• Nausea and vomiting:
• Add an antiemetic to the PCA (ondansetron 4mg, cyclizine 50–
100mg, haloperidol 2mg)
• Prescribe an antiemetic on a regular basis
• Change the opioid.
• Breakthrough pain: add regular NSAID and paracetamol, if not
contraindicated. Increase the bolus dose, or consider a background
infusion if severe.
• respiratory depression: this is caused by the direct action of opioids
on the respiratory centre. All opioids, given in equianalgesic doses,
have the same potential for respiratory depression. this is a relatively
uncommon side effect, and if doses are properly titrated, the risk is
small. the best early clinical indicator of respiratory depression is
increasing sedation. Opioid doses are adjusted, so that the sedation
score remains below 2 (table 41.7). respiratory depression (rr <8/
min) is reversed with IV naloxone (100– 400 micrograms).
Table 41.7 Sedation scores
Sedation score
0 Patient wide awake
1 Mild drowsiness. Easy to rouse
2 Moderate drowsiness. Easy to rouse
3 Severe drowsiness. Difficult to rouse
4 Asleep but easy to rouse

## 頁面 1185

6114
1164 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Epidural analgesia
regional anaesthesia reduces acute pain and chronic pain after some sur-
gical procedures and can reduce length of hospital stay.7 Other benefits of
epidural analgesia are:
• the incidence of postoperative atelectasis and pulmonary infection is
reduced, improving oxygenation. Effective pain relief allows the patient
to cough, breathe deeply and cooperate with physiotherapy. Epidural
analgesia combined with GA reduces pulmonary complications in
thoracic, abdominal and lower limb procedures, and is of proven benefit
in patients with pulmonary disease.8,9
• the hypercoagulable response to surgery is attenuated, and fibrinolytic
function is improved by attenuation of the stress response. this has
been shown to be of benefit for graft survival in patients undergoing
lower limb revascularisation.
• Epidural analgesia reduces pain and opioid consumption, and has been
shown to reduce the duration of both ileus and time to 1st flatus.
there has been concern that epidural analgesia increases the risk of
anastomotic leakage perhaps caused either by gut hypoperfusion or by
an increase in peristalsis 2° to associated sympathectomy, but this has
not been consistently demonstrated.
• reduction in surgical site infections.9
• there is, however, no survival benefit in high-r isk patients, despite being
beneficial in terms of pain relief and respiratory function.10
Contraindications
• Patient refusal, staff untrained in epidural care on wards and
contraindications to catheter or needle placement (local or general
sepsis, hypovolaemia, coagulation disorders, concurrent treatment with
anticoagulant drugs and some central neurological diseases).
Troubleshooting
Breakthrough pain
Consider:
• Adding regular PO/ Pr/ IV NSAID and paracetamol, if not
contraindicated.
• Bolus dose (3– 5mL), followed by i infusion rate.
• Check all connections and insertion site.
• Check the block level (with ice or touch). If block patchy or unilateral,
withdraw the catheter to 2cm in space.
• Bolus dose of opioid only (fentanyl 50– 100 micrograms, diamorphine
2– 3mg).
• Pruritus; give naloxone (50– 100 micrograms), and consider adding 300
micrograms to infusion fluids or removing the opioid from the epidural
infusion. Antihistamines may give some relief.
• hypotension: check fluid status of the patient who is probably relatively
hypovolaemic. Check block height. Consider reducing the infusion rate.
If acute/ severe, raise the legs; give fluid bolus and vasopressor.
• Motor block: reduce the infusion rate. Consider reducing LA
concentration.
• Complications of epidural analgesia are summarised in table 41.8 (see
also % p. 844).

## 頁面 1186

EPIDurAL ANALGESIA 1165
Table 41.8 Complications of epidural analgesia
Complication Incidence (%) Management
Dural puncture 0.16– 1.3 Bed rest, analgesia, hydration, blood patch
(see % pp. 848–51)
headache (benign, 16– 86 Bed rest, analgesia, hydration; suspect dural
not PDPh) puncture
Nerve or spinal 0.016– 0.56 Immediate neurological assessment
cord injury
Catheter 0.15– 0.18 remove catheter, and resite if appropriate
migration
Epidural abscess 0.01– 0.05 MrI or Ct scan. Immediate neurosurgical
and haematoma 0.0004– assessment. Antibiotics (see also %
0.03 p. 847)
respiratory 0.13– 0.4 Decrease in opioid concentration may be
depression required
hypotension 3– 30 IV fluids ± vasopressors. temporarily
reduce or stop infusion
Pruritus 10 Naloxone IV (50– 100 micrograms) ±
antihistamine
urinary retention 10– 30 (in ♂ ) Catheterisation
Motor block 3 Check for catheter migration. temporarily
cease infusion. Consider epidural
haematoma (see % p. 847)
Schug, S.A., Palmer, G.M., Scott, D.A., et al. Acute pain management: scientific evidence. 4th
edn. Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists and Faculty of Pain Medicine,
Melbourne; 2015.
Drugs used for epidural analgesia
to minimise the side effects of each class of drug and provide optimal anal-
gesia, a combination of an opioid and a low concentration of LA solution is
given by continuous infusion. Commonly used mixtures are:
• Bupivacaine 0.125% with 5 micrograms/ mL of fentanyl or 100– 125
micrograms/ mL of diamorphine
• Bupivacaine 0.1% with 5 micrograms/ mL of fentanyl or 100
micrograms/ mL of diamorphine
• Bupivacaine 0.0625% with 2 micrograms/ mL of fentanyl or 50
micrograms/ mL of diamorphine.
there is no universally accepted optimal combination of drugs. Infusion
rates vary, according to the concentration, surgical site and dermatomal
level of the epidural catheter placement. usual infusion rates for the above
solutions are 8– 15mL/ h for adult patients, and reduced rates of 4– 8mL/
h in patients over 70y of age. Some anaesthetists reduce or avoid epidural
opioids in the very elderly and use LA solutions only.

## 頁面 1187

6116
1166 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Intrathecal opioids
Opioids can be administered intrathecally, in combination with LA,
during spinal anaesthesia. the opioid is delivered directly into the CSF, so
avoiding distribution into epidural fat and blood vessels. Consequently, the
doses used are much smaller, compared to epidural or parenteral routes
(table 41.9).
• the more lipid-s oluble the drug, the more rapid the onset and the
shorter the duration of action.
• Pethidine has LA, as well as opioid, properties. It can be used as the sole
drug for spinal anaesthesia (requires higher doses).
• Delayed or late respiratory depression can occur with the less lipid-
soluble drugs (particularly morphine). Increasing patient age, high doses
of opioid administered intrathecally, concurrent use of sedatives and
systemic opioids are associated with i risk of respiratory depression.
• Diamorphine (if available) offers the best combination of duration of
analgesia with fewest side effects.
Table 41.9 Comparison of intrathecal opioids
Opioid Intrathecal Onset Duration (h)Epidural dose
dose (min)
Morphine (preservative- free) 0.1– 0.2mg 15– 30 8– 24 2– 3mg
Pethidine (preservative- free) 10– 25mg <5 1– 2 10– 50mg
Fentanyl 10– 25 <10 1– 4 50– 100
micrograms micrograms
Diamorphine 0.25– 0.5mg <10 10– 20 2.5– 5mg
Spinal infection
Extreme vigilance is needed for all patients who have had epidural anal-
gesia because of the risk of spinal infection.11,12 Only 13% of patients with
an epidural abscess present with the classical triad of fever, backache and
neurological signs and symptoms. Back pain is the initial symptom in 75% of
cases. Fever occurs in 66% of cases. Only two out of three patients have
leucocytosis. A raised ESr (>30mm) is a consistent finding. If there is suspi-
cion of infection, a full infection screen and blood cultures are mandatory.
the epidural catheter should always be removed immediately and sent to
the laboratory for microbiological investigation. Ninety per cent of spinal
infections are bacterial, mainly Staphylococcus aureus. MrI with gadolinium
is the investigation of choice. the whole spine should be scanned early,
before neurological signs and symptoms occur. Once muscle weakness is
present, only 20% of patients regain full function, even after spinal surgery.
Poor recovery is predicted by patient age (older patients do worse), extent
of cord compression and duration of neurological symptoms (<36h has
better prognosis). Mortality from an epidural abscess is 10%. treatment is
based on surgical or percutaneous abscess drainage and antibiotics. Steroids
are contraindicated.

## 頁面 1188

CONtINuOuS PErIPhErAL NEr VE BLOCKADE 1167
Continuous peripheral nerve blockade
there are many potential benefits of continuous PNB. Successful catheter
placement relies on a high degree of skill in a practitioner who is already
very familiar with single- shot PNB (see % p. 1108).
table 41.10 suggests typical bolus and infusion rates for PNB: 0.5% or
0.25% ropivacaine or levobupivacaine is commonly used for the initial
bolus; 0.1–0 .25% levobupivacaine or ropivacaine is used for the continuous
infusion. Safe doses must be calculated on a per kg basis for every patient.
Do not exceed 0.6mg/ kg/h for either levobupivacaine or ropivacaine.
Absolute contraindications for this technique include: patient refusal, skin
infection at or near the puncture site, systemic infection, pyrexia, bleeding
diathesis (including systemic anticoagulation), peripheral neuropathy and
compartment syndrome.
Table 41.10 typical bolus and infusion rates for peripheral nerve blockade
Catheter site Initial bolus Basal rate Patient- controlled bolus
(mL) (mL/ h) (mL)
Interscalene 25– 35 3– 5 3– 5
Axillary 30 5– 10 5
Femoral/f ascia iliaca 30 4– 6 5– 10
Sciatic 15– 20 2– 4 2– 4

## 頁面 1189

6118
1168 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Abdominal wall blocks
Abdominal wall blocks are performed on the principle of high-v olume LA
deposition within a fascial plane13 (see % pp. 1128–34). Abdominal wall
blocks avoid the risks and adverse effects of CNB and provide a relatively
safe alternative to thoracic epidural anaesthesia. these blocks may there-
fore be warranted where epidural anaesthesia has not been possible either
for technical reasons or due to patient wishes, where the risk of complica-
tions is i (e.g. sepsis, coagulopathy or pre-e xisting neurological conditions)
or in circumstances such as unexpected conversion to an open surgical
procedure.
• the duration of abdominal wall blockade can also be prolonged by
catheter placement, especially where enhanced recovery protocols
are used.
• there are a number of ultrasound-g uided techniques for abdominal wall
blocks for intra- abdominal surgery: tAP, quadratus lumborum, erector
spinae plane and transversalis fascia plane blocks.
• Infusion of LA by catheter into the posterior rectus sheath can provide
effective postoperative analgesia and reduce opioid requirements.
rectus sheath catheter (rSC) insertion can be performed by
the anaesthetist under ultrasound guidance or by the surgeon at
laparotomy.
• rSC LA dosing regimens reported in the literature vary.14 Manual bolus
regimens include: 20mL of ropivacaine 0.2% or 20mL of bupivacaine
0.25% or 20mL of levobupivacaine 0.25% 6- hourly to each catheter.
Pump- delivered LA bolus regimens via a Y- connector to both rSCs
include: 40mL of ropivacaine 0.2% 4- hourly and 18mL of ropivacaine
0.5% 4- hourly. Continuous LA infusion of ropivacaine 0.2% at 8mL/h
via an elastomeric pump connected to each rSC has been described.

## 頁面 1190

StIMuLAtION-PrODuCED ANALGESIA 1169
Stimulation- produced analgesia:
transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation and acupuncture
Stimulation techniques activate the body’s pain modulation systems. the
gate control theory of pain by Melzack and Wall in 1965 provided a model
to explain this phenomenon.
• Incoming noxious pain signals are reduced by presynaptic and
postsynaptic inhibition in laminae 1– 5 in the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord. Modulatory input arrives via the descending pathways and
lateral branches from myelinated afferent A-fi bres. A- fibres arise in
low- threshold mechanoreceptors activated by tENS, and in high-
threshold mechanoreceptors activated by needles used in acupuncture
techniques.
• tENS: A-fi bres are recruited at 50–2 00hz and respond to low- intensity
stimulation, increasing levels of the inhibitory neurotransmitters
dynorphin A and B in the dorsal horn. Pain relief occurs immediately
but lasts only as long as stimulation continues.
• Acupuncture: A-fi bres are recruited at 2–4 hz, responding to high-
intensity stimulation by increasing inhibitory neurotransmitter met-
enkephalin levels in the dorsal horn. Pain relief takes 20–3 0min but lasts
hours or days.

## 頁面 1191

7110
1170 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Non- opioid adjuvant analgesic drugs
the occurrence of persistent postsurgical pain following surgery is be-
coming increasingly recognised. Acute postoperative neuropathic pain does
not usually occur in isolation; there will also be nociceptive pain as a result
of tissue damage/ inflammation.
• About 14% of patients presenting to the pain clinic attribute their pain
to surgery, with the pain beginning acutely.
• Patients may complain of an unusual type of pain different from the
usual postoperative nociceptive pain. Patients often describe the pain as
burning or shooting in nature. Pain may extend beyond the territory of
a single peripheral nerve.
• the pain is often poorly responsive to opioid analgesia, despite high
doses being administered and may be:
• Allodynia: pain following a normal innocuous stimulation
• Hyperalgesia: pain disproportionate to a noxious stimulus
• Dysaesthesias: spontaneous unpleasant abnormal sensations.
• the presence of a neurological deficit, such as brachial plexus avulsion
or spinal cord injury, makes the presence of acute neuropathic pain
more likely.
• risk factors for persistent postsurgical pain include young adult
age group, genetic predisposition, psychosocial factors, severity of
perioperative pain, neuropathic pain, general chronic pain states and
type of surgery.15,16 these patients may benefit from an ‘individualised’
pain management plan.
Treatment
Currently, there is some evidence to support the use of the following inter-
ventions in preventing persistent postsurgical pain.7
Mechanisms of neuropathic pain involve CNS changes and i per-
ipheral nerve excitability. Drug therapy focuses on reducing neuronal
hyperexcitability and reducing activity of the N- methyl- D- aspartate
(NMDA) receptor in an attempt to reverse neuronal changes.
Ketamine NMDA receptor antagonist in the CNS and peripheral nervous
system. NMDA receptor activation has a key role in the development
of central sensitisation, wind-u p and pain memory, resulting in chronic
postsurgical pain (CPSP). Ketamine has been used as an adjuvant analgesic
in a variety of settings, with a reported reduction of up to 25% in pain
intensity and 30– 50% in analgesic consumption up to 48h after surgery.
the analgesic effect of ketamine is independent of the type of opioid
used, timing of ketamine administration and dose of ketamine.17 Major side
effects are uncommon. Psychomimetic side effects are more common in
patients undergoing awake procedures, compared to GA.18. At the present
time, there is insufficient evidence to recommend ketamine as a routine
perioperative analgesic. More concrete evidence is required to ascertain
the role of ketamine in modulating the development of CPSP.

## 頁面 1192

NON-OPIOID ADJuVANt ANALGESIC DruGS 1171
Gabapentinoids Gabapentin and pregabalin are increasingly used as
adjuvants for perioperative analgesia. they act on presynaptic Ca2+ channels
and inhibit neuronal Ca2+ influx. they may prevent central sensitisation and
subsequent hyperalgesia and allodynia. Gabapentinoids have been used
to contribute to better postoperative pain management, enhance opioid
analgesia, prevent opioid tolerance, reduce the incidence of PONV, pruritus
and urinary retention and prevent persistent postsurgical pain, as well as
having useful anxiolytic and sleep-m odulating properties. however, a
recent meta- analysis has thrown doubt on the routine use of these drugs
perioperatively.19 they are not likely to be sufficiently effective if used as
sole agents for the management of acute postoperative pain.8,20 Common
side effects are drowsiness, dizziness and gait disturbance.
Lidocaine Lidocaine has analgesic, anti- inflammatory and antihyperalgesic
properties. Level 1 evidence from GI surgery demonstrates d pain scores,
opioid analgesic consumption and side effects.21 IV lidocaine can be a useful
acute pain adjunct to achieve enhanced recovery after surgery. Patients may
show particular benefit when they have acute hyperalgesia and opioids are
not effective in treating acute pain. IV lidocaine is contraindicated when
other regional anaesthesia techniques are concurrently used, especially
where boluses or large doses of any LA are used. Examples include epidural,
plexus blocks and tAP blocks. IV lidocaine infusion can be administered 4–
8h after the last epidural, regional catheter bolus or tAP block and is best
initiated without giving a bolus dose first. having appropriate monitoring
and nursing policies in place is vital before considering a lidocaine infusion
for acute pain. there is no clear consensus on the dose, but many studies
used a bolus of 100mg or 1.5– 2mg/ kg at least 30min prior to incision,
followed by an infusion of 1.5– 2mg/ kg/ h intraoperatively and up to 24h
postoperatively. No major complications were reported. IV lidocaine may
prevent the development of CPSP by inhibition of NMDA receptors and
polymorphonuclear leucocyte priming.
α2- adrenoceptor agonists this group of drugs are a useful adjuvant
in perioperative care because of several extra- analgesic properties,
such as sedation, anxiolysis, prevention of postoperative shivering and
PONV, mitigation of the stress response, anaesthetic- sparing effect
and supplementing neuraxial and peripheral nerve blocks. they act at
supraspinal, spinal and peripheral sites, causing membrane hyperpolarisation
and reduced Ca2+ conductance into cells. Clonidine and dexmedetomidine
are the two commonly used drugs in this class. Dexmedetomidine is
78 times more specific at the receptor, but analgesic efficacy seems
comparable.22 A recent review showed that systemic clonidine and
dexmedetomidine were associated with a moderate decrease in pain
intensity, opioid consumption and early postoperative nausea. Clonidine
was associated with i intraoperative and postoperative hypotension, and
dexmedetomidine with i incidence of bradycardia. the best dose, timing
and route of administration required to produce maximum benefit and
minimum harm are unknown. Currently, there is no evidence to suggest
that perioperative use of α2- agonists has a preventive analgesic effect or
reduces the incidence of CPSP.

## 頁面 1193

7112
1172 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Post- amputation pain Pre- emptive regional analgesia (regional analgesia
commenced before surgical incision with the aim of being more effective
than the same treatment started after surgery) has conferred little
benefit for preventing CPSP. In contrast, preventative regional analgesia
has demonstrated some promising results (although data are limited).
Perineural blockade provides excellent analgesia for surgical stump pain
following limb amputation, and in doing so can attenuate peripheral and
central sensitisation that may either prevent or at least minimise the impact
of phantom pain. Many studies looking at the use of regional anaesthesia
in the prevention of phantom limb pain discontinue neural blockade
within 48h of surgery. Borghi et al.23 demonstrated a very significant
reduction in the incidence of phantom limb pain with the use of prolonged
perineural blockade. they reported only a 2% incidence of phantom pain
by continuing neural blockade for up to 80d after amputation. Prolonging
perineural blockade to this extent is unlikely to be feasible in most hospitals,
but enhancing existing practice is possible.
Continuous perineural blockade is commenced perioperatively with
400mL of ropivacaine 0.2% infused via an elastomeric pump at 10mL/ h
if a single catheter is used or 5mL/ h per catheter if two infusions are re-
quired for above- knee amputations. Perineural blockade is continued for a
minimum of 80h after amputation to get a patient beyond the crucial 1st
days of maximal pain in order to minimise sensitisation. Local experience
indicates this is probably the single most important technique for acute pain
management after amputation and is crucial in decreasing the likelihood of
developing significant phantom limb pain.

## 頁面 1194

PErSIStENt PAIN PAtIENtS IN ACutE PAIN 1173
Persistent pain patients in acute pain
Basic principles
Patients with persistent pain presenting for surgery present an additional
challenge to the anaesthetist striving for effective postoperative pain con-
trol. the concept of total pain is very useful. Pain is a combination of phys-
ical, spiritual, emotional and social injury, not simply tissue damage. Most
of these patients have some form of psychiatric illness such as depression,
anxiety, emotional dysregulation or personality or addictive disorder. these
will impact on their perception of pain, and therefore recovery. Clearly it is
not the role of the anaesthesthetist to address these issues, but an under-
standing of, and empathy with, them is hugely beneficial for the anaesthetist,
the patient and the nursing staff.
Preoperative assessment
the underlying principle is to fully optimise the patient. Ideally this group of
patients will have seen a pain physician and have a plan for acute pain, but
this is often not the case. An acute pain plan for the patient with persistent
pain is about mood, as well as drug management.
It is very useful to establish baseline pain levels. For all its faults, the nu-
merical 0– 10 scale is very useful, easy to use and well understood. (A mild–
moderate– severe scale can also be used.) this is important because if the
baseline pain is 7/1 0, there is little point aiming for a pain score of 3/1 0
after surgery. there is a move away from describing pain as the ‘5th vital
sign’ and from aiming to completely abolish pain. the current thinking is to
focus on optimisation and function. Pain is 2° to function and although im-
portant, elimination of pain should not be the 1° endpoint. this concept is
sometimes difficult to accept for patients, their relatives and those looking
after them.
• Patients are often already on a number of medications with the
potential for interactions. For simplicity, there are two major groups:
• respiratory depressants: opioids, benzodiazepines and
gabapentinoids
• Potential to cause serotonin syndrome: SSrIs, serotonin
noradrenergic reuptake inhibitors (SNArIs), tCAs, lithium, 5- ht
3
inhibitors, ketamine, pethidine and, to a lesser degree, fentanyl.
tramadol is very potent in this regard. In this group of patients, it
is not always possible to avoid co- prescribing these medications.
therefore, the concept of ‘serotonin load’ is useful; as the load
increases, so does the risk.
• the psychosocial history is probably the most important aspect of care
in this group but, with modern day-o f- surgery admission, arguably the
most difficult to address.
Drug management
• use the simple analgesic ladder.
• use regional nerve or plexus catheters where possible.
• Opioids (see % pp. 1176–8 for long- term opioid use and the opioid-
dependent patient). Consider PCA in this group.
• Ketamine.24 there are a number of effective dosing regimes for either
perioperative or postoperative use. A conservative and safe maximum
is 0.1mg/ kg/ h. Infuse at this rate for 24– 48h only. If the patient requires

## 頁面 1195

7114
1174 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
higher doses or a longer duration for pain control, then discuss with a
pain specialist.
• Lidocaine infusions:14 1– 2mg/ kg/ h or combined with ketamine, e.g.
25mg of ketamine added to 20mL of 2% lidocaine running at 0.1mL/
kg/ h.
• Antineuropathic medications. these include tCAs (amitriptyline 10mg
nocte, NNt of 3– 4) and gabapentinoids (e.g. gabapentin 300mg tds,
NNt of roughly 7).
• Psychotropic drugs. this group can be particularly useful for
management of distress. haloperidol 2.5– 5mg IV or PO is probably
most familiar to anaesthetists, but the atypical antipsychotics quetiapine
(12.5– 25mg) or risperidone ( 0.5– 1.0mg) are also helpful.
• Benzodiazepines are also useful to manage distress. Consider lorazepam
(1– 2mg), temazepam or diazepam.
Non- drug management
On occasion, despite best management, no relief from pain can be
obtained. It is important to eliminate ongoing tissue damage and request a
surgical review if necessary. Once this has been ruled out, then it is useful
to bear in mind the concept of total pain and explore these avenues. this
can be very rewarding if you are comfortable in this area, but equally it may
be appropriate to ask for psychiatric consultation.
Predictability
Sometimes a patient in this group has less pain than predicted and follows
a relatively normal clinical pathway, but most commonly pain is a major
problem. As a simple rule of thumb, this group will need three times the
analgesia for three times as long and be three times as sore, no matter what
you do.
Distress management
Distress and anxiety compound pain are often manifest as out- of- control
pain, even in those in whom you would not expect such a response.
reassurance or sometimes specialist pain or psychiatric input may be re-
quired. refer to the flow chart in Fig. 41.2.
Plan and progress
It is important that all members of the treating team are consistent in their
approach to analgesic management. A well-d ocumented plan is key. It is ac-
ceptable to change the plan, but communicate with all members of the team
and the patient. Sometimes patients can play on the lack of consistency and
split the team. remember to start discharge planning well in advance.

## 頁面 1196

PErSIStENt PAIN PAtIENtS IN ACutE PAIN 1175
Out-of-control pain
Take history, examine patient,
check blood results
and available imaging
Yes Concerned this is new or
Request a surgical review
progressive pathology?
Review analgesic medications
Yes
Try simple measures such as
Is anxiety a major feature?
breathing techniques
Yes
Add analgesics carefully Can you safely add more
analgesics?
Explore psychosocial issues
If unsuccessful, try anxiolytics or major
tranquillisers:
Diazepam 2−5mg, haloperidol
2.5−5mg,
quetiapine 12.5−25mg,
risperidone 0.5−1mg
Ask for psychiatric or
pain specialist help
Try to avoid simply adding
more medication
Fig. 41.2 Aide memoire for approaching persistent pain patients with acute
perioperative pain.

## 頁面 1197

7116
1176 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Long- term opioid use and the opioid-
dependent patient
the number of patients who are receiving long- term opioid therapy has i
dramatically, and the provision of analgesia in the perioperative period can
be challenging. there is evidence to suggest that two- thirds of patients re-
ceiving a dose of >120mg/d PO morphine equivalent, or those treated for
a duration of >3mo, are likely to continue their medication for years. the
aim is to bring acute pain under control.
• Opioid- dependent patients normally fall into one of three groups:
opioid addicts, chronic non-c ancer pain and cancer pain. the principles
of management are the same for each group.
• tolerance is a decrease in sensitivity to opioids, resulting in less effect
from the same dose. Opioid- tolerant patients report higher pain scores
and lower incidence of opioid- induced nausea and vomiting.
• Physical dependence is a physiological phenomenon characterised by
a withdrawal reaction when the drug is withdrawn or an antagonist is
administered.
• Addiction is a pattern of drug abuse characterised by compulsive use
despite evidence of harm.
• Pseudoaddiction is an iatrogenic drug- seeking behaviour, normally
due to undertreatment of acute pain by the physician, and perhaps
‘undertreated patient’ would be a more appropriate term for
this group.
• Withdrawal: symptoms and signs of withdrawal include yawning,
sweating, anxiety, rhinorrhoea, lacrimation, tachycardia, hypertension,
diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and cramps. On average,
these symptoms peak at 36–7 2h after the last dose. Aims of treatment
are provision of analgesia, prevention of opioid withdrawal and
management of abnormal drug- taking behaviour. Non- opioid analgesics,
such as paracetamol and NSAIDs, should be prescribed regularly if
possible. Opioid- tolerant patients are at risk of opioid withdrawal
if non- opioid analgesic regimens or tramadol are used. PO or SC
clonidine (50 micrograms 8-h ourly) can be used to treat symptoms of
opioid withdrawal.
• An objective assessment of function, e.g. the ability to cough, may be a
better guide to opioid requirements than pain scores.
• Opioid requirements will, in general, be much higher than in non-
opioid- dependent patients. the initial dose prescribed should take the
patient’s current opioid requirement into account. It may be difficult
to judge current opioid use when illicit drugs have been taken. the
GP, local pharmacist or drug rehabilitation centre may provide helpful
information.
• Whenever possible, regional analgesic techniques should be used.
• PCA with larger- than- average bolus doses is the preferred means of
administrating opioids.25 PCA settings may need to include a background
infusion to replace the usual opioid dose, and a higher bolus dose. total
dose should be i until acceptable analgesia is achieved or until side
effects prohibit any further dose increase. Opioid rotation may be of
use, particularly with an agent of higher intrinsic opioid agonist activity.7

## 頁面 1198

LONG-tErM OPIOID uSE AND thE OPIOID-DEPENDENt PA tIENt 1177
• the aim is to eventually discharge the patient on no more opioid than
was used before admission. Normally, dose reductions of 20–2 5%
every day towards the preadmission opioid intake will avoid symptoms
of withdrawal.
• Patients in drug- free recovery may be concerned about the risk of
relapse into active SAD if given opioids for acute pain management. use
of multimodal analgesic strategies, reassurance that the risk of reversion
is small and information that ineffective analgesia can paradoxically lead
to relapses in recovering patients help avoid undertreatment.
Opioid- induced hyperalgesia
Opioid- induced hyperalgesia (OIh) is a paradoxical phenomenon whereby
an opioid can induce a pronociceptive state in the CNS. OIh was first ob-
served in patients taking methadone for opioid addiction. the underlying
mechanism is complex but likely to involve a combination of glial cell activa-
tion, NMDA receptor activation, glutaminergic activation and alterations in
opioid intracellular signalling. As a result, the treatment of OIh necessitates
an opioid dose reduction. this can be a difficult concept to understand for
a patient who is in pain, as well as for their doctor. Nevertheless, it is often
difficult to clinically distinguish between opioid tolerance, OIh and progres-
sion of the underlying disease process. Importantly, patients with OIh may
report more diffuse and widespread pain and ‘sensitivity’ which does not
respond to an increase in the dose of opioid. It was previously thought that
OIh only occurred in patients on long-t erm opioids, but both tolerance and
OIh have been associated with short-t erm use of high- potency opioids,
e.g. remifentanil.
Converting from IV to PO opioid
Patients will need to be converted back to PO medication as their clin-
ical situation allows. A typical strategy for returning to PO medication is
to identify the IV opioid consumption in the previous 24h and convert this
to an equivalent PO dose. Fifty per cent of this PO equivalent dose is then
given in a sustained- release form, and one- sixth of the equivalent dose is
prescribed as an immediate- release preparation every 4h.
Opioid maintenance programmes
Opioid maintenance programmes often use a single daily dose to prevent
withdrawal and not to treat pain. Splitting the dose into two or three div-
ided doses can increase the analgesic effect.
Methadone
A long-a cting mu- agonist, NMDA antagonist and monoamine reuptake in-
hibitor. Patients who are receiving methadone maintenance therapy should
be managed as any other opioid- tolerant patient. In the acute pain setting,
methadone should be continued at the same dose. If the patient is unable
to take methadone PO, substitution with parenteral methadone or other
opioids may be required in the short term. Additional opioids should be
used to manage acute pain if appropriate.

## 頁面 1199

7118
1178 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
Naltrexone
A long-a cting competitive opioid antagonist with a duration of action of
748– 72h. Chronic use results in i sensitivity to morphine-i nduced analgesia
and a doubling of brain mu- and delta- opioid receptors, which may return
to baseline in 76d post- treatment. It is recommended to stop naltrexone
72h prior to surgery, and it is important to note that although patients may
be resistant to opioids while taking naltrexone, they may then become
extremely opioid- sensitive once stopping it. It is therefore imperative to
maximise opioid-s paring strategies (e.g. regional anaesthesia) and consider
managing the patient in a high dependency setting in the postoperative
period, to ensure appropriate monitoring of treatment. usual maintenance
dose is 25– 50mg daily.
Buprenorphine
this partial opioid agonist is used in the treatment of opioid addiction.
Commonly prescribed doses are 8– 32mg. the high receptor affinity and
long half- life of buprenorphine result in difficulty obtaining effective an-
algesia by simply adding further opioid. At high doses of Suboxone®
(buprenorphine and naloxone), e.g. 22–3 2mg, there is a theoretical con-
cern that buprenorphine will antagonise the effect of a full agonist. there
are very few reports describing perioperative pain management of patients
administered high-d ose buprenorphine. Strategies in this situation have
included continuing the usual dose of buprenorphine and either (1) pro-
viding additional full opioid agonists or (2) prescribing supplemental doses
of buprenorphine. An alternative strategy involves rotating to a full agonist
before surgery such as methadone. the author recommends continuing the
patient’s usual dose of buprenorphine, maximising the use of opioid-s paring
adjuncts, and using conventional full opioid agonists to treat acute pain. the
doses of opioid required for analgesia may be appreciably higher than one
would expect for other opioid-t olerant patients and in view of this, it may
be advisable to monitor the patient in a high dependency environment.

## 頁面 1200

SPECIFIC PAtIENt GrOuPS 1179
Specific patient groups
Substance abuse disorder
A substance abuse disorder (SAD) exists when the extent and pattern of
substance use interfere with the psychological and sociocultural integrity
of the person. Patients with SAD may be abusing CNS-d epressant drugs
(alcohol, benzodiazepines, opioids) or CNS-s timulant drugs (cocaine, am-
phetamines, ecstasy, cannabinoids).
Effective management of acute pain in patients with SAD may be
complicated by:
• Psychological and behavioural characteristics
• Presence of the drug of abuse and morbidities related to it
• Physical dependence (physiological phenomenon characterised by a
withdrawal reaction when the drug is withdrawn or an antagonist is
administered) and the risk of withdrawal
• Medications used to assist with drug withdrawal or rehabilitation
• Ethical dilemmas arising as a result of the need to balance concerns of
undermedication against anxieties about safety and possible abuse or
diversion of the drugs
• Management of pain in patients with SAD which should focus on
prevention of withdrawal- effective analgesia and symptomatic
treatment of affective and behavioural problems.
Personality disorders
Personality disorder is common among those with persistent pain and by
definition, this is a difficult group to manage. there is no magic approach.
Stick to basic principles and the outline above. revisit the concept of total
pain. Communication is the key—t o the patient, to the team and to the GP.
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)
there is evidence that those who have previously had CrPS are more
likely to develop CrPS from a subsequent injury or surgery (up to 1000
times). there is no magic preventative approach. Appropriate consent is
therefore very important. the evidence around use of high-d ose vitamin C
(500– 1500mg/ d for 50d) is controversial and of low quality as it is extrapo-
lated from older ♀ wrist fractures.26 Consider regional techniques and/o r
intraoperative ketamine, although this is empirical.
Fibromyalgia
this is a difficult disease to understand, but even more difficult to endure.
this is the archetypal example of central sensitisation where non-n oxious
stimuli are interpreted as noxious. In a perioperative patient, sorting out
what is noxious vs non-n oxious is extraordinarily difficult. these patients
are very sensitive to even minor stimuli and often have multiple drug
sensitivities.
Further reading
royal College of Anaesthetists (2020). Guidelines for the provision of anaesthesia services for inpatient
pain management. M https:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ sites/ default/ files/ documents/ 2020- 02/ GPAS-
2020- 11- Pain.pdf
Simpson GK, Jackson M (2017). Perioperative management of opioid-t olerant patients. BJA Educ,
17, 124– 8.
Faculty of Pain Medicine. Opioids Aware. M https:// www.fpm.ac.uk/ opioids- aware

## 頁面 1201

8110
1180 ChAPtEr 41 Acute pain
References
1 Kehlet h (1994). Postoperative pain relief: what is the issue? Br J Anaesth, 72, 375– 8.
2 Gerbershagen hJ, Aduckathil S, van Wijck AJ, et al. (2013). Pain intensity on the first day after sur-
gery: a prospective cohort study comparing 179 surgical procedures. Anesthesiology, 18, 934– 41.
3 Scott DA, McDonald WM (2008). Assessment, measurement and history. In: Macintyre PE,
rowbotham D, Walker S (eds). Clinical Pain Management: Acute Pain, 2nd edn. London: hodder
Arnold; pp. 135– 53.
4 Bombardier C, Laine L, reicin A, et al. (2000). Comparison of upper gastrointestinal toxicity of
rofecoxib and naproxen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. VIGOr Study Group. N Engl J Med,
343, 1520– 8.
5 ross JAS (2000). Isoflurane entonox mixtures for pain relief during labour. Anaesthesia, 55,
711– 12.
6 National Institute for health and Care Excellence. British National Formulary. M https:// bnf.nice.
org.uk/
7 Schug SA, Palmer GM, Scott DA, et al. (2015). Acute Pain Management: Scientific Evidence. 4th
edn. Melbourne: Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists and Faculty of Pain
Medicine.
8 van Lier F, van der Geest PJ, hoeks SE, et al. (2011). Epidural analgesia is associated with im-
proved health outcomes of surgical patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Anesthesiology, 115, 315– 21.
9 Smith LM, Cozowicz C, uda Y, et al. (2017). Neuraxial and combined neuraxial/g eneral anes-
thesia compared to general anesthesia for major truncal and lower limb surgery: a systematic
review and meta-a nalysis. Anesth Analg, 125, 1931– 45.
10 hopkins PM (2015). Does regional anaesthesia improve outcome? Br J Anaesth, 115, Suppl 2,
ii26– 33.
11 royal College of Anaesthetists (2009). National audit of major complications of central neuraxial
block in the United Kingdom. Report and findings. M http:// www.rcoa.ac.uk/ nap3
12 Joshi SM, hatfield rh, Martin J, et al. (2003). Spinal epidural abscess: a diagnostic challenge. Br J
Neurosurg, 17, 160– 3.
13 Chin KJ, McDonnell JG, Carvalho B, et al. (2017). Essentials of our current understanding: ab-
dominal wall blocks. Reg Anesth Pain Med, 42, 133– 83.
14 Cowlishaw PJ, Kotze PJ, Gleeson L, et al. (2017). randomised comparison of three types of
continuous anterior abdominal wall block after midline laparotomy for gynaecological oncology
surgery. Anaesth Intensive Care, 45, 453– 8.
15 Schug SA, Bruce J (2017). risk stratification for the development of chronic postsurgical pain. Pain
Rep, 2, e627.
16 van helmond N, Olesen SS, Wilder- Smith Oh, et al. (2018). Predicting persistent pain after sur-
gery: can predicting the weather serve as an example? Anesth Analg, 127, 1264– 7.
17 Laskowski K, Stirling A, McKay WP, et al. (2011). A systematic review of intravenous ketamine
for postoperative analgesia. Can J Anaesth, 58, 911– 23.
18 McCartney CJL, Sinha A, Katz J (2004). A qualitative systematic review of the role of N-m ethyl-
D- aspartate receptor antagonists in preventive analgesia. Anesth Analg, 98, 1385– 400.
19 Verret M, Lauzier F, Zarychanski r, et al. (2020). Perioperative use of gabapentinoids for the
management of postoperative acute pain: a systematic review and meta-a nalysis. Anaesthesiology,
133, 265– 79.
20 reddi D (2016). Preventing chronic postoperative pain. Anaesthesia, 71, 64– 71.
21 Barreveld A, Witte J, Chahal h, et al. (2013). Preventive analgesia by local anaesthetics: the re-
duction of postoperative pain by peripheral nerve blocks and intravenous drugs. Anesth Analg,
116, 1141– 61.
22 Blaudszun G, Lysakowski C, Elia N, tramer Mr (2012). Effect of perioperative systemic α- 2
agonists on postoperative morphine consumption and pain intensity: systematic review and
meta- analysis of randomized controlled trials. Anesthesiology, 116, 1312– 22.
23 Borghi B, D’Addabbo M, White P, et al. (2010). the use of prolonged peripheral neural blockade
after lower extremity amputation: the effect on symptoms associated with phantom limb syn-
drome. Anesth Analg, 111, 1308– 15.
24 Loftus rW, Yeager MP, Clark JA, et al. (2010) Intraoperative ketamine reduces perioperative
opiate consumption in opiate-d ependent patients with chronic back pain undergoing back sur-
gery. Anesthesiology, 113, 639– 46.
25 Naa- Afoley Quaye A, Zhang Y (2019). Perioperative management of buprenorphine: solving the
conundrum. Pain Med, 20, 1395– 408.
26 Zollinger PE, tuinebreijer WE, Breederveld rS, Kreis rW (2007). Can vitamin C prevent
complex regional pain syndrome in patients with wrist fractures? A randomized, controlled,
multicenter dose- response study. J Bone Joint Surg Am, 89,1424– 31.